The Project Gutenberg eBook of Up the ladder, by Madeline Leslie

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Up the ladder
       or, striving and thriving

Author: Madeline Leslie

Release Date: February 28, 2023 [eBook #70168]

Language: English

Produced by: an anonymous Project Gutenberg volunteer.

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UP THE LADDER ***

Transcriber's note:  Unusual and inconsistent spelling
is as printed.



THE LESLIE STORIES.

UP THE LADDER;
OR,
STRIVING AND THRIVING.
BY
MRS. MADELINE LESLIE.

AUTHOR OF "TWO HOMES," "ROBIN'S NEST STORIES," 
"TIM THE SCISSORS GRINDER," ETC. ETC.

"The hand of the diligent maketh rich."
"The desire of the slothful killeth him; for his hands refuse
 to labor."



BOSTON:
YOUNG & BARTLETT.
26 SCHOOL STREET.

Entered, according to Act of Congress, In the year 1863,
By A. R. BAKER,
In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the District of
Massachusetts.

ELECTROTYPED BY
W. F. DRAPER, ANDOVER, MASS.



To
MY SON WILLIAM,
WHO IS JUST ENTERING ON THE DUTIES OF ACTIVE LIFE,
THIS LITTLE VOLUME
IS AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED BY HIS
Loving Mother,
IN THE HOPE THAT THE EXAMPLE OF ITS HERO MAY INSPIRE IN HIM
THE VIRTUES WHICH WILL ENSURE SUCCESS.



CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
HARRISON AND ELLA
"Six days shalt thou labor and do all thy work."

CHAPTER II.
OYSTER-SALOON
"If any will not work, neither shall he eat."

CHAPTER III.
THE NEW BONNET
"He that loveth pleasure shall be a poor man."

CHAPTER IV.
HARRISON IN TROUBLE
"The drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty."

CHAPTER V.
HARRISON IN AFFLICTION
"Slothfulness casteth into a deep sleep."

CHAPTER VI.
HARRISON'S NEW HOME
"But if any provide not for his own, especially for those of his
own house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel."

CHAPTER VII.
HONEST COWLES
"Work with your hands, that ye may walk honestly toward them that
are without, and that ye may have lack of nothing."

CHAPTER VIII.
HARRISON LEAVING SCHOOL
"The Lord blesseth the habitation of the just."

CHAPTER IX.
HARRISON BECOMING A MERCHANT
"In all thy ways acknowledge him; and he will direct thy paths."

CHAPTER X.
THE SECRET PARTNER
"It is joy to the just to do judgment; but destruction shall be
to the workers of iniquity."

CHAPTER XI.
HARRISON'S STORY
"Be sure your sin will find you out."

CHAPTER XII.
HARRISON'S REWARD
"The hand of the diligent maketh rich."

CHAPTER XIII.
ALFRED A SAILOR
"The expectation of the wicked shall perish."

CHAPTER XIV.
THE PARTED SHIP
"God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble."

CHAPTER XV.
FRANK'S RETURN HOME
"For this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost and
is found."

CHAPTER XVI.
CONCLUSION
"Seest thou a man diligent in business; he shall stand before kings;
he shall not stand before mean men."



UP THE LADDER;
OR,
STRIVING AND THRIVING.

CHAPTER I.

HARRISON AND ELLA.

"Six days shalt thou labor, and do all thy work."

ON the steps leading into the back court of one of the largest hotels
in the city of — might be seen, early on a June morning, a lad
apparently about ten years of age. He was a rosy, good-humored boy,
and was at this moment whistling a lively tune in a subdued tone,
while his hands were busily employed in shelling peas.

Before him, on the stone pavement, stood a bushel-basket of peas
in the pod. From this basket he transferred them to a pan in his lap,
and from thence, when shelled, to a larger one which stood within
the door. He had just commenced his task, but seemed not at all
discouraged by it. He went on merrily, whistling "Dan Tucker,"
occasionally glancing up toward a platform which was used for drying
clothes. This had a light railing around it; and presently he was
rewarded by the glimpse of a bright face, surrounded with golden
curls, peeping shyly at him. His smile was followed by a silvery
laugh from behind the railing; and soon the little face beamed on him
again.

"Good morning, little boy!"

He smiled and nodded. The whistling had ceased. He thought her voice,
sweeter than music. His eyes feasted upon her happy countenance;
but his hands plied faithfully their task.

"Ar'n't you sorry you has got so many peas to shell?"

"No, I'm glad," was the low response.

"Don't you like to have me talk to you?"

"Oh yes!"

There was a heartiness in the tone which gave great emphasis to the
words. The child, after shaking her curls and laughing gaily, asked,
"Why don't you talk to me, then?"

Harrison, for that was the boy's name, paused. He did not know
exactly how to put his thoughts into words; but presently he said,
"I am a poor boy, and perhaps your mother wouldn't like it."

"I'll ask her, then;" and away tripped the miss, through the
long hall, up stairs to her mother's room. "O mamma! there's a boy
down stairs; I know him very well, because I've seen him every day.
He always looks so pleasant, and whistles such pretty tunes, and I
want to talk to him; but he is afraid you wouldn't like it."

"Did he say so?" inquired the lady, laughing at the idea.

"Yes, mamma."

"What is he doing?"

"Shelling peas. His face is very clean, mamma; and I do want to talk
to him so much," urged the pleading voice.

"That is really a great recommendation; and as he is so modest,
I don't think there can be any harm in your talking with him."

"Mamma is willing!" exclaimed the child, returning to the railing.
"So now will you please tell me why you like to shell so many peas?"

"Because I can earn money by doing it. I like to do any kind
of work."

A thoughtful expression passed over her bright face; she seemed
disappointed at the answers. At length she asked, "What makes you
like money so well? I don't."

"I don't like money," replied the boy; "but if I did not earn any
I should not have bread for my breakfast and supper. I am poor,
you know; but mother says I am a great deal happier for working.
The Bible says, 'He that will not work, neither shall he eat.'"

"I never work," answered the child, in a sad tone.

"Oh! it don't mean such little girls as you! But I dare say you
do work some. Don't you help your mother make the beds and dust the
chairs? I had a little sister once, and she could do that."

"No," said Ella, shaking her head in a sorrowful manner. "Bridget is
the chamber-girl. I wish I could work; but I only play with my dolls
all day, except when I go to ride with mamma."

The boy looked somewhat surprised at this entire exemption from care;
but he said, soothingly, "I dare say you will work when you are
older. Mother says the command in the Bible is for all: 'Six days
shalt thou labor and do all thy work.'"

Ella stood looking gravely upon the lad as he sat steadily at his
employment, and then said, "Will you please tell me about your
sister? What was her name?"

"Isabella. Oh, she was a dear little girl! She had eyes just like the
blue sky, and such a pretty mouth, always full of, smiles. Now she's
gone home to God."

"Oh dear!" exclaimed Ella, "that's too bad. How could you let her
go away?"

For a moment the boy ceased his employment, raised his tear-dimmed
eyes to the clear sky, then brushed away the glistening drops, and
resumed his work. Presently, in a subdued voice, he replied,
"God gave her to us, and he had a right to take her again, you know.
Mother cried dreadfully; but she said, 'God knows what is best.'
I miss her every night," said the boy, choking back his tears,
"I loved her so dearly."

"Shall you go away when you've finished the peas?" asked Ella,
anxious to turn from so painful a subject.

"Oh no! I shall do the beans next. See, I'm almost done."

"Why! won't you be tired?"

"No indeed. I have a great mind to tell you my secret."

The child filled the air with her musical laugh. "I do like to hear
secrets," she said.

"Well, I'm trying to work real hard, because I want to buy mother
a straw bonnet, and some pretty ribbon to put on it. It will be
so nice to wear to church, you know." At this moment a voice in the
hall called, "Ella! Ella!" and the child tripped away.

It seemed to Harrison as if the sun had gone behind a cloud when her
laughing face disappeared from the railing; but he entered with
renewed zeal into his work, saying to himself, "I wish mother could
see her; she's a dear little thing!"



CHAPTER II

THE OYSTER-SALOON.

"If any will not work, neither shall he eat."

IT was nearly two o'clock before Harrison went home. First he had
to prepare the string-beans; then one of the boarders called him
to do an errand, for which he paid him a dime, after which the cook
gave him a number of chores to do; so that altogether he had made
quite a profitable morning of it. Beside this, he had eaten a hearty
dinner, as indeed he did almost every day, before he left the hotel,
and, with the consent of the proprietor, carried home a basket
of broken pieces for his mother.

Harrison was an obliging little fellow. Always civil in his conduct,
prompt and faithful in whatever he was required to do, he had
rendered himself a favorite with all. Much of this he owed to his
mother, who was untiring in her instructions to her boy. She was very
fond of giving Scripture authority for her advice, and of enforcing
her commands by the word of God. In this way, though only a lad
of ten years, Harrison was far better acquainted with the teachings
of the Bible than many who were twice his age.

On the morning in question he was unusually happy: first, because he
had two dimes to add to his secret fund for the new bonnet; and next,
because he had enjoyed a pleasant talk with the little girl.

Mrs. Danforth was setting the table for dinner when he entered, and
received him with a warm smile of welcome.

"See how much I have earned!" said the boy, giving her a hearty kiss,
and then pouring into her open palm several small pieces of silver.

"You know, my dear," she replied, with a smile, "who it is that said,
'The hand of the diligent maketh rich;'" then taking his basket,
she added, "but you have brought quite a feast. I hope you have not
dined."

"Oh yes, I have! But I expect there are pretty nice things in there.
I heard one of the cooks talking about it. A gentleman came in and
ordered a dinner at one o'clock: pigeons, fricasseed chicken, and
lots of other dishes. Waiter told the cook he just tasted them, and
then sent them away. He had no appetite, he said. I told cook if he'd
get up in the morning and work, as I did, he'd have appetite enough.
She laughed and said, 'Well, they're paid for, and you may put them
in your basket.'"

"I hope Mr. Clarkson knows how much she gives us," suggested the
woman, stopping in her work of taking the rich food from the basket.

"I wouldn't take it without," replied the boy, drawing himself
proudly up to his full height. Only last week he told her not to
encourage the street beggars, but to give to those she knew were
worthy, and who tried to help themselves. "Once in a while, too,
he meets me with my basket, and he looks in and says, 'That's all
right, boy.'"

Just at this moment the door opened, and Mr. Danforth entered. He was
quite a gentlemanly-looking man, of about thirty-five years. A close
observer might have noticed a shade of anxiety passing over the
wife's countenance; but after a second glance she seemed happily
disappointed, and her spirits rose accordingly.

"You are just in time," she said; "dinner is all ready."

"And I'm ready for it," was the hearty reply. "I've been walking all
the morning, and I expect at last I've found just about the right
thing for me to do. Ho! those birds look as if they would relish
finely!"

Harrison then repeated the story of the dyspeptic gentleman, at which
his father laughed and said, "It's an ill wind that blows no one
good. Now I'm perfectly willing he should order dinners and pay for
them; we'll find good appetites for them, wont we, Bub?"

"I suppose," remarked Mrs. Danforth, "that he is one of those who
will not work, and therefore, though he has an abundance, cannot
eat."

"Waiter said he looked awful sickly," added Harrison.

"I expect I've engaged myself in a first-rate situation," resumed
Mr. Danforth, laying down the bones of a chicken he had been sucking.

"What is it?" eagerly inquired his wife.

"Why, it's a kind of an overseer-general in an oyster saloon."

"I had rather you would shovel coal," exclaimed Mrs. Danforth, in a
tone of great disappointment.

"What in the name of nature can you have to say against
an oyster-saloon? It would bring me into company and constant
intercourse with some of the first gentlemen of the city."

"That is just what I feared. I am afraid of the temptation for you,
my dear husband."

"What, after I've pledged myself to you to let alone all kinds of
intoxicating drinks?" The man colored and looked somewhat annoyed;
and his wife, noticing that Harrison was listening eagerly, added
suddenly, "When you are rested, my dear, I wish you would carry home
this vest to the tailor's and bring me some more work."

"I'm rested now, mother, so I'll be off;" and taking the bundle
he ran down the stairs, whistling merrily at his favorite tune.

When he was gone Mrs. Danforth kindly remonstrated with her husband,
urging the inexpediency of placing himself in the way of temptation,
when work could surely be obtained elsewhere. He argued that here
he could be treated as a gentleman, that he could have better wages,
and altogether it was a fine opportunity. At any rate he had gone
too far to recede.

His wife sighed heavily, but ceased to urge him further.

"The man was very much taken with my appearance," resumed
Mr. Danforth, feeling that he had gained his point. "I'm to know
whether he accepts my terms before night. So keep up good courage.
I shall be able to support you like a lady yet—who knows?" and he
turned to leave the house.

"I'm quite contented in the lot Providence has assigned me," remarked
the woman, gazing into her husband's handsome but irresolute
countenance. "Ah!" said she, when he had disappeared, "'beauty is
vain.' I fear his good looks and his gentlemanly appearance will be
the cause of his ruin."

At night Mr. Danforth came home in grand spirits, and announced that
he had been engaged at a good salary, and was to commence his labors
in the morning. His wife bravely repressed a sigh, tried to smile,
and to feel hopeful. Presently Harrison came home in a pleasant state
of excitement. He was just about to narrate his afternoon's success
to his mother, when he noticed that his father was present, and, with
a prudence which had been dearly bought by past experience, waited
until he should find her alone.

"I think," remarked Mr. Danforth in a self complacent tone, as they
sat around the neatly arranged board, "that when I am fairly
established in my new situation I shall take you there, Harrison,
as waiter. You would do the work charmingly, and be quite an ornament
to the place."

"Oh, no!" exclaimed the mother earnestly, "I can never give
my consent."

"I had much rather go to school," responded the boy; "I have
so little time now to learn."

"If God prospers us, I mean to have you go next fall and winter,"
said his mother. "Now that you," turning to her husband, "are to have
such great wages, you will be able to get him a good suit
of clothes."

"I don't calculate on being able to do much in that way at present,"
replied the father in some confusion. "It'll cost me a good deal
for my own dress; and then, it's better for the boy to depend on
himself. He might learn to be idle you know, and that's against your
principles, wife. Besides, Bub, you can read and write now, and keep
accounts nigh about as well as I can."

"You're not going out again, I hope," said Mrs. Danforth, anxiously,
as he arose and took his hat.

"I told Mr. Lamson I'd be down there, and kinder get used to things
to be ready for tomorrow, that's all. I'll be back again in an hour
or so."

"There's wood to cut," she urged, "and it will be very lonely without
you."

"Harrison will cut some till I come."

"I'll clear away the tea things, mother, and then read to you,"
cried the boy, in a cheerful tone, as he saw how difficult it was
for her to keep from shedding tears. "And I haven't told you yet
what a fine chance I had this afternoon. A gentleman at the tailor's
shop asked me to go 'way up town for him to carry a note. He paid me
well, too; but the best of it was, that the lady to whom I carried it
gave me a book and an omnibus ticket, so I rode all the way back.
But I forgot to tell you that the tailor would have some work ready
this evening: perhaps I had better run and get it now."



CHAPTER III

THE NEW BONNET.

"He that loveth pleasure, shall be a poor man."

"MAMMA," asked Ella Haven, after breakfast the next morning, "will
you please let me work. I want to help Bridget make the beds, or do
something."

"Nonsense, child! play with your baby-house, and make the beds
in that if you please." Turning to her husband, she asked, with a
laugh, "What idea do you suppose the child has now?"

"Do please let me, mamma! The boy down stairs told me his sister
worked, and that the Bible says we all must work. So I do want to."

"That is good preaching," remarked Mr. Haven. "Who is the boy, Ella?"

The child told all she knew of her young friend, and that he
would not talk to her until she had obtained her mother's permission.
"I've seen him about here, and sent him errands more than once,"
said the gentleman. "He is a sturdy little fellow, and will make
something yet."

In the mean time, Harrison was at his place in the back-court,
evidently anticipating with much pleasure another visit from his
young friend. Nor was he disappointed. Just as he had comfortably
arranged his baskets, a happy laugh announced her approach.

"How do you do this morning?" she asked, with the familiarity of an
old acquaintance. Then, without waiting for an answer, she continued,
"have you bought the bonnet yet?"

"Oh, no! I haven't half money enough! though I earned a great deal
yesterday. I want to get a real nice one; but I don't know how much
it will cost."

Ella ran to her mother's room out of breath with excitement.
"How much does a bonnet cost, mamma; a straw one, with a pretty
ribbon on it? Harrison is going to buy one for his mother, and we
don't know how much it costs."

"We, indeed," repeated the lady with an arch glance at her husband,
who was just leaving the room, "a bonnet costs anywhere from two to
twenty dollars."

The child tripped back again to carry the important information.

Harrison laughed merrily at the idea of his mother in a twenty-dollar
bonnet. "When I think I have enough," he said, "I shall go into a
store and ask the price of such an one as I want."

"Do you work every day?" inquired Ella. "Every day but the Sabbath.
I go to church then, and to Sabbath school. Perhaps I shall go to
day-school next winter. If I do, I mean to study real hard."

"Who will buy your bread then?"

"Father and mother; and I shall work too when I'm out of school.
I had six houses last winter where I shovelled the snow from the
steps and sidewalks. I earned a new pair of shoes and a coat. Mother
says, after all, the habit of diligence is worth more to me than what
I earn."

"I wish I could work," exclaimed the child; "but there is nothing
for me to do. Sometimes I get papa's slippers for him. I mean to do
it every day. Oh! I forgot to tell you my brother is coming home
to-day! He's been away at boarding school. When you come to-morrow
I'll take him down here to see you. I'm so glad he's coming home.
His name is Alfred,—for papa."

Harrison did not feel the same interest in the brother as he had
in the sister. Though about his own age Alfred looked much older,
and, though handsome, yet had an unpleasant expression upon his
countenance. To please Ella he went down to be introduced
to Harrison, anticipating, as he told his mother, some capital fun.

"This is my brother," said Ella, holding his hand fondly. "I told him
you wanted to see him."

Alfred drew up his form; but Harrison only glanced at him with a
smile.

"He can whistle beautifully," rejoined Ella, glancing in her
brother's face. "I've heard him a good many times."

"He shells peas well, I see," said Alfred; "I suppose he has a great
deal of practice."

Harrison colored; not at the charge, but at the sneering tone of the
youth. He wondered how such a boy could be related to Ella.

"When I get a place, I'll hire you to shell peas for me," continued
Alfred, in a patronizing manner. "I shall hire a great many
servants."

"I don't expect to shell peas all my life," replied Harrison,
proudly.

"Ha! what do you expect to do?"

"I can't tell yet."

"Perhaps you think you shall be rich, and ride in a coach."

"It may be so. I learned a verse from the Bible last night; it was
this: 'Seest thou a man diligent in his business, he shall stand
before kings; he shall not stand before mean men.'"

Alfred had sense enough to know that the lad had the best of the
argument. He therefore turned on his heel and walked away, followed
closely by his sister, though not until she had given Harrison
a parting nod and smile.

Poor fellow! he had not been at home many days before the rich pastry
and confections with which his parents pampered his appetite, laid
him on a bed of sickness. During his confinement he was so fretful
and hard to please that his patient little sister at length became
weary of staying at his bed-side, and was glad to escape to the open,
shady balcony, where she could have a glimpse of the cheerful
countenance of her new friend.

With a child's quickness of discernment, however, she soon discovered
that he was not as happy as when she first knew him. He no longer
whistled when busy at his work, and his face at times wore a look
of anxious care. Ella tried her utmost to persuade him to confide his
griefs to her, but in vain; he smiled sadly, but shook his head.

It was indeed true that sorrow and anxiety had entered the abode of
Mr. Danforth. Since his employment in the saloon he was often out a
great part of the night; sometimes not returning home for days
together. When he did so, his whole character seemed so much changed
for the worse that his poor wife could take no comfort in his
society. It was quite evident that he had entirely forgotten his
pledge of abstinence from intoxicating drinks. His pallid countenance
and sunken eyes would have betrayed him to his watchful wife, even if
his unsteady gait and offensive breath had not done so.

For the sake of her son Mrs. Danforth wore in his presence a cheerful
face, though it often concealed an aching heart, sore with its secret
griefs.

"I wish we lived in the country, mother," exclaimed Harrison
one evening.

"Why! my dear, those were just my thoughts at that moment; but
perhaps sorrow would follow us even there."

"We might have a little farm. Wouldn't that be nice? I don't think
there are any oyster saloons in the country, mother."

"Perhaps not, dear; but those who are disposed to run into
temptation, will find danger lurking everywhere."

It was now some weeks since Harrison had begun to save money for the
new bonnet. The next afternoon following this conversation he was
sent upon an errand, and unexpectedly received three shillings
for the promptness and fidelity with which he performed it. This,
added to his stock on hand, would make just four dollars.
He determined to appropriate the whole of it, and instantly hurried
home to ask his mother to accompany him to a milliner's. On his way
he saw a pretty straw bonnet, ready trimmed, hanging in a show-case,
and could not resist the temptation of asking the price. What was his
delight to find it less than the sum he had earned. So great were his
excitement and joy that he burst into his mother's room, startling
her not a little by his abrupt entrance.

"Come!" he exclaimed, "come quick, mother! I want to show you
something. Oh, I'm so happy! Please put on your bonnet, and come
with me to the next street."

"What is it, dear?" she asked, in some surprise, "I had rather know
before I go out."

"Well, then, please wait a minute and I'll tell you." He ran into his
small room, put his hand under the ticking, and drew out a small
purse. Happiness swelled his young heart almost to bursting. This was
his first gift. It was to his dearest earthly friend, purchased with
his own earnings. Suddenly his heart almost ceases to beat. He misses
the familiar sound of the silver pieces, so fondly treasured,
so often counted. He holds the purse up to the light; he presses
his fingers convulsively upon it. Yes, he realizes that his hard
earned money is gone,—all gone,—and with one loud cry throws himself
across his narrow bed.

Mrs. Danforth ran quickly to his aid, but he could not speak;
his disappointment was too great. At length he began:

"It's too bad! It's too mean to steal money from a little boy
like me, and from an own son too. He shall give it back! It's mine,
and I'll have it again," were his expressions, uttered in a loud
angry tone, so different from his usual tender voice that his mother
started from him in amazement.

A passionate burst of tears at length relieved the poor boy, and,
sitting at his mother's feet, he unfolded to her the secret
so carefully cherished, and the bitter disappointment which had
overwhelmed him.

Mrs. Danforth's tears fell thick and fast; not at the loss of the
bonnet, not even at the grief of the boy, sad as it was, but at the
downfall of all her hopes. She pressed her hands upon her heart and
sobbed aloud, "O God! that I should have lived to see this day!
Give me strength to bear thy chastening rod."



CHAPTER IV.

HARRISON IN TROUBLE.

"The drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty."

WHEN Harrison awoke the next morning it was with the remembrance
of some great sorrow, like that after his little sister's death.
He pressed his hands to his forehead, and presently the events of the
previous evening rushed into his mind. It was not merely the loss,
but the manner of the loss, which so distressed the poor child.
The thought that his father, who, since entering the oyster-saloon,
had never paid one farthing toward the support of his family, should
be guilty of such insufferable meanness as to steal the earnings
of his little son, was what crushed his young heart. For the first
time since he had been old enough to work, his mother found it
difficult to start him forth to his daily toil. He appeared wholly
discouraged; and not until she appealed to him by his love for her
and his sympathy in her afflictions, could she excite him to any
ambition, or even hope for the future. Poor woman! It was indeed a
great self-sacrifice for her to send him away from home. She actually
yearned for his society and sympathy now that her heart-strings
seemed one by one breaking, as her hopes for her husband died away
within her breast. But she knew by past experience that he would be
far happier to be engaged in his regular employment than if he sat
down to brood over his griefs.

When he reached the hotel, a carriage was just driving away, and
Harrison had only time to catch a glimpse of the beautiful face
of Ella and the pale one of her brother before they turned the corner
of the street and disappeared from view. Tears of disappointment
filled the swollen eyes of the poor boy, though a moment before he
had hoped that he should not see Ella that morning. How could he
account to her for his altered appearance. He could never expose the
shame of his father.

Through the day Mrs. Danforth waited and watched for the coming of
her husband. She hoped he would return during the absence of
Harrison. But she waited and watched in vain. Many times during the
morning her heart beat fast, and then almost ceased to beat, as she
fancied she recognized his footstep upon the stairs; but when it
passed she was obliged to lay down her work, so faint and languid was
she from the intense excitement. At noon Harrison had only time
to run home and tell her that he had been sent of an errand up town,
and should not return until night.

How she passed the long hours until sundown she never could tell;
but at length she experienced such a dreadful pressure upon her
spirits that she could endure it no longer. She hastily prepared
for a walk, and bent her steps toward the fatal spot which had proved
the grave of all her hopes for her husband's reformation. Arrived at
the scene, she cast wistful glances through the long windows,
but could not see him. It was a place where women were not often
found, and she shuddered as she turned the handle of the door and
stood within the room. A coarse-looking man stopped suddenly in his
passage across the floor with a waiter of oysters, and she asked,
in a hesitating manner; "Is Mr. Danforth here?"

"Danforth? No; he has not been here today. Mr. Lamson has scolded
well, and threatened to give him walking orders; so if you see him
you'd better send him along quick step."

"O! my poor misguided husband!" groaned Mrs. Danforth, as she feebly
turned from the door. "Why will you wander from the only friend
you have on earth! Why will you throw away the love of the one heart
that clings to you in the midst of sorrow and disgrace!"

When Harrison ran hastily home after his long walk, he found the key
turned in the door and his mother absent. This was so unusual
a circumstance that he wondered much what could have called her out
at such an hour. The busy scenes of the day had served to divert
his mind from himself, and the natural buoyancy of youth had already
turned the channel of his thoughts, so that hope once more whispered
of bright visions in the future. But now, as he wandered listlessly
about the rooms, looking so dismal at this hour without her whose
smile had always seemed to give light and warmth to the place,
he wondered that he could call any event sorrowful while she was left
to him.

At last he heard a weary footstep ascending the stairs, and darted
across the room to welcome his mother. The deepening twilight
prevented him from seeing the expression of woe upon her features;
but he knew she was tired, and exclaimed, cheerfully, "I'll put on
the tea, mother! that always rests you." The table was already
spread, and the mother and son seated themselves.

"I do wonder where father is?" cried Harrison, for the first time
since his loss mentioning his father's name. "I guess he's ashamed
to come home."

"Hush, dear! don't speak so! I'm afraid something has happened
to him. I went to the saloon, but he has not been there all day."
The poor woman covered her face, and the sobs that would not be
longer suppressed burst forth.

Harrison's sympathy was excited at once. "I wish I knew where to go
and inquire for him, mother," he said; "but he has often been gone
longer than this. Perhaps he will be home before we go to bed."

Mrs. Danforth listened to his cheering words, and tried to hope that
they would prove true; but the long weary weeks of anxiety since her
husband had been in the oyster-saloon had worn upon her frame, and
she was conscious of being really unfit for exertion. Then her head
ached terribly, so that she was easily persuaded to go to bed, where
the remainder of the evening Was passed in listening to her son as he
read passage after passage from her favorite Psalms.

The next morning Harrison awoke early, and, having dressed himself
in haste, ran softly down the stairs, before the other inmates of the
house were astir, and sped quickly away to the street where his
father worked. But to his disappointment, when he arrived at the
saloon, the door was barred, and, after knocking several times,
was just on the point of leaving, when a colored man drew back
the bolt.

From this person, who was cleaning the rooms, the boy learned that
his father had of late been so unsteady in his attendance upon his
business that his employer had threatened to turn him away. This was
all the information that he could gain, and with it he ran home
to comfort his mother.

She had risen, and was wondering where he had gone.

"Good news, mother!" he called out, "I have been to father's place.
He is not there yet, but the man told me he had often been absent
before. Now, when he did not come home, we always thought he was
there; so I guess he'll come back again just as he has always done."

"Thank you, my son; I really hope it may be so; and now if you will
cut a few sticks of kindling we will have some breakfast."

Harrison cut the wood, kindled the fire, and swept the room, and then
said, "If you can get along now, mother, I'll go to the hotel.
I promised cook I'd be there right early. They have orders for a
grand dinner to-day. She'll be sure to give me some breakfast, and
I'll be home as soon as I can."

Fortunately for Harrison, his habits of neatness and industry
rendered him of great service to his employers. He went from one
thing to another as he was bid, and, amidst all the confusion and
scolding of the kitchen, was always civil and obliging, ready to give
a helping hand to any one who needed his assistance. Mr. Clarkson
visited the kitchen to give orders about the extra work, saying that
he would hire in more help if it was necessary. Cook told him she had
rather have Harrison than half a dozen strangers, for he would do
just what she told him. The gentleman patted him on the head, called
him a smart boy, and then, taking out his porte-monaie, presented him
with a silver half-dollar.

There was so much to be done that the lad feared he should miss
seeing his little friend but at last one of the waiters asked him
to scour a tray of knives, and he gladly took refuge with his brick
and board out of the heated kitchen into the cool, shady court.

"Why, Harrison! how do you do? I have looked for you this long time,"
soon called out the familiar voice. "I went into the country
yesterday, and we're all going out there for the summer. I wish you
could go too."

"I wish I could," said the boy seriously.

"Have you bought the bonnet yet?"

"No; I never can buy one. My money was all stolen away. I had four
dollars, enough to buy a real beauty: but it's all gone now."

Harrison's lips quivered, and the tears gushed to his eyes.

"Oh, that is too bad! I'm very sorry; don't cry." Ella, whose own
eye-lashes were heavy with unshed tears, ran quickly to impart to her
mother the sorrowful tale.

She was absent more than fifteen minutes, and the lad had nearly
completed his task when she reappeared, jumping up and down for very
gladness.

"Harrison!" she called out, "when you've done your work you must be
sure and come to our room, number five in the long hall. Mother has
something to give you. Oh, won't you be glad! Don't you forget, now."

The boy did not think it very likely he should forget; but, faithful
to his employers, he gathered up his well-scoured knives and
re-entered the kitchen, saying as he did so, "I'm so busy to-day,
I don't know when I shall be ready to go home."

The dinner was a triumph. Every body said so. Mr. Clarkson and all
concerned were in high spirits, and Harrison came in for his full
share of praise. It was half-past five when he took his well-filled
basket from the cook, and setting it in a safe place, washed his face
and hands till they shone then, having smoothed his hair out in the
court with his pocket-comb, he ascended the stairs in search of
number five.

Mr. Haven had come in, and was seated in a large lounging-chair
giving his wife an account of a sad scene he had just witnessed.
A man had been found in the dock, having apparently been in the water
two or three days. Some papers in his pockets informed the police who
he was, and in coming from the wharf he had passed them, bearing the
body to a wagon to convey it home.

"Had he a family?" inquired Mrs. Haven, with deep feeling.

"I did not learn," was the reply.

In the mean time Bridget had answered Harrison's low knock, and he
had advanced halfway across the room before his presence was noticed,
so absorbed were they in the sad tale.

"O mamma! here is Harrison!" called out Ella.

"Don't scream so, Ella!" exclaimed Alfred in a fretful tone. "Your
voice goes right through my head."

"Come here, my boy," said Mr. Haven, kindly. "Ella says you're in
trouble."

The lad blushed, but answered modestly, "I lost all my money, sir.
I suppose she told you what I was saving it for."

"Yes, and it was a very worthy object. Have you any suspicion of the
thief?"

Poor boy, his head fell upon his breast and his lips trembled as he
replied softly, "Yes, sir, but I had rather not tell who it was."

"I dare say he stole it himself," cried Alfred, spitefully.

"Leave the room, Alfred," said his father, sternly.

"O brother!" remonstrated Ella, "how wicked to talk so."

Harrison held up his head, and gave one lightning glance
of indignation into the face of the ill-natured boy. There was truth,
honesty, and wounded feeling in the expressive countenance; and both
Mr. and Mrs. Haven grew every moment more interested in the
young lad.

"You have a good mother, I know," added the gentleman, in whose mind 
rose a suspicion of the truth. "Ella has told us about her, and so
Mrs. Haven has prepared a present for her."

The little girl brought carefully on her outstretched hand, from the
next room, a neat bonnet, tastefully trimmed.

"Thank you, oh, thank you, ma'am!" exclaimed the boy, with a look of
unmistakable gratitude. "How pleased mother will be. Shall I take it
now, ma'am?"

"Yes! Are you going directly home? Bring me the box, Ella."

After again expressing his pleasure in a low voice to the child,
Harrison took the bandbox, and, passing through the kitchen, obtained
his basket, and ran all the way home.



CHAPTER V.

HARRISON IN AFFLICTION.

"Slothfulness casteth into a deep sleep."

IT was nothing unusual for Harrison to see a company of men standing
idly at the door of the block in which his father hired three rooms;
but as he ran joyfully up the steps he thought their manner strangely
subdued, as they stood solemnly aside to let him pass. On the first
floor a woman who had always been kind to him suddenly came out
of her apartment and pulled him in.

"Poor child!" said she, "trouble has come to your mother. I couldn't
bear to let you go by and not speak a word to comfort your dear
heart."

"What is it? where is mother?" he asked, wildly rushing up the
stairs.

Oh, what a sad sight presented itself to his view! Stretched on the
cherry table, at which he had so often eaten, lay the insensible body
of his father, bloated and disfigured so as scarcely to be
recognized, except by those who loved him so well.

With one dreadful shriek of agony Harrison sprang past the lifeless
form, and sank down at his mother's feet.

Who shall dare to describe the anguish of that torn and bleeding
heart? She sat there alone with her dead, her form rigid, her eyes
strained and fixed upon that poor remnant of humanity. She caught
her breath at long intervals, and with great effort; while her hands
were still clutching the papers which had been the means of informing
the authorities of the name and residence of the deceased.

The entrance of her son slightly roused her. She turned her eyes
upon him with, oh! so sorrowful a glance, and taking his head between
her hands as he sat on the floor before her, moaned piteously.
"O God! forgive me that I scarce know how to pray for myself,
when prayer for him can no longer avail. Be present with me in this
dreadful hour. Support me, Lord, or I shall sink under my heavy load
of grief." She then burst out, "Oh that I could have seen him once
more! Oh that I could have entreated him to prepare to meet his God!"

Here her sobs convulsed her whole body and Harrison becoming
frightened at the violence of her grief, started to his feet, crying,
"Mother, dear mother, don't cry so!" Just then the door opened, and
the clergyman of whose church she was a member entered.

The good man afterwards described the hour which followed as one of
the most trying of his life. But I must not linger upon this
afflicting scene. By the liberality of the church to which
she belonged, all the arrangements were made for a decent funeral
of the deceased; and the poor widow buried her dead out of her sight,
forever.

The same charitable hands also provided a suit of plain mourning
for Mrs. Danforth and for her son, and promised to be responsible
for her rent until she could decide upon her future course of life
and make arrangements for their support.

As it was now some time since her husband had aided in the support
of the family, Mrs. Danforth thought it no risk to retain the rooms
she at present hired, and, with the aid of her son, to endeavor
to meet her expenses by vest-making.

The affliction with which she had been visited had brought her
into connection with some of the church, hitherto unknown, and their
ready sympathy was a cordial to her sorrowing heart.

Harrison returned to his work at the hotel, but found that Mr. Haven
had gone, with his family, to the country.

Month after month glided away, until it was nearly time for the fall
term of the city schools to commence. Our little hero intended
to present himself among the earliest pupils. He longed for the time
when he should again be busy with his books and slate. During the
summer Mrs. Danforth found it difficult to obtain work, so many
persons were out of the city, and at length consented to the wishes
of one of her new friends that she should go into a family as nurse.
Her only objection to this was that it would deprive her son of a
home, which she considered of the first importance to him at his
tender age. But, as she was able to obtain permission for him to pass
his evenings in the family of one of the neighbors in whom she had
confidence, the difficulty was relieved. He had, for some time, been
considered a regular boarder at the hotel, where, since his father's
death, he had been more than ever a favorite.

At this period Mrs. Danforth had been in three families, had given
entire satisfaction, and now her services were eagerly sought.

She still retained one room in the tenement she formerly occupied,
and had returned to it only the previous day, when Harrison came home
in the middle of the afternoon to inform her that Mr. Haven had
returned from the country, and that Ella was dangerously ill.
The poor boy was very much excited by the sad news, and had prevailed
upon one of the chamber-girls to go and recommend his mother
as nurse, hearing they had difficulty in obtaining one. Harrison was
accordingly summoned to the chamber, and on being questioned
gave references to the places where she had nursed, and now he
expected they would come for her.

Mrs. Danforth told him she had no immediate engagement, but thought
it doubtful whether she should be summoned. Indeed, she hoped not.
She dreaded exceedingly the publicity of a hotel.

When Mr. Haven called, however, she could not resist his pleading
for her to go and take care of his darling child, nor the silent
entreaty of Harrison's glistening eyes; and in another hour she was
an inmate of the large public house.

Poor little Ella had been seriously ill only three days, but her
flesh was all wasted away, and her large, earnest eyes were so
protruded that they formed the prominent features of her face.
Her fever ran very high, and rendered her delirious when she first
awoke. At other times she was conscious of all that occurred
around her.

Mrs. Haven took advantage of a moment when she was free from pain,
and introduced the new nurse, knowing it would give the child so much
pleasure.

Ella smiled a faint, wan smile, and presently whispered, "Is your boy
sorry I'm sick?"

"Yes, indeed," answered nurse. "He could not rest until I came
to take care of you."

"He came to the door, my darling," added the lady, "and begged us
to send for his mother."

The child smiled again, and seemed satisfied, and soon sunk into a
quiet sleep.

Two days more and there seemed scarcely a hope that the dear little
girl could recover. Her parents, worn out with their previous
watching and with the corroding care which filled their breasts grew
more and more desponding every time the physician called.  Nurse
alone maintained her belief that the disease had abated, and that
only nourishment and tender care were needed, to restore her
to health. She pointed out the favorable symptoms to the physician,
who allowed her to try the effect of a spoonful of chicken tea.
She went to the kitchen, being unwilling to trust any one but herself
to make it. The experiment was attended with perfect success; and the
grateful parents could not sufficiently express their thanks. From
this time the emaciated form began to resume some faint resemblance
to its former self. In three weeks from Mrs. Danforth's entrance
to the sick-chamber, the doctor said they had no more need of him;
adding, as he gave his hand, at parting, to the faithful nurse,
"Under God, the child owes her life to your watchful care. If there
were more nurses like you, fewer doctors would be required."

"It is pleasant to cooperate with a true man," was her smiling reply.

After this, whenever Dr.— was asked to recommend a nurse, he had
but one reply: "Get Mrs. Danforth, if you can."

All this time poor Harrison had embraced every opportunity to steal
softly up stairs and wait at the door of number five until some one
came out from whom he could learn about the patient. Now he often
caught a glimpse of his mother as she passed through the kitchen, and
one day she told him if he would come up to the door of the
sick-room, she would invite him in to see his young favorite.

Ella was seated in a large chair, pillows being placed around her
to keep her upright, when he entered. His mother had told him she was
very much better, almost well; but when he saw her pale, thin face,
resting upon her little hand, in which every vein was clearly
visible, he stood motionless with surprise and disappointment.

The little girl gazed earnestly in his face, and then, after waiting
a moment for him to speak, Ella said, "Why, Harrison I thought you'd
be glad to see me; but you seem real sorry."

"I didn't know you'd been so very sick," faltered the boy.
"I'm afraid you never will be well enough to go out on the shed."

Ella laughed right merrily. It was a happy sound for her mother
to hear. She had not laughed audibly before since she was ill.

"I'm going to school next week," rejoined Harrison.

"Alfred has gone to school again," she said.

"Has he? Well, I must bid you goodbye."

"Will you come again?"

"If mother thinks it won't hurt you; and I'll bring you a little mite
of a top, that you can spin in your fingers right in your chair."



CHAPTER VI.

HARRISON'S NEW HOME.

"But if any provide not for his own, and especially for those of his
own house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel."

DURING the sickness and convalescence of their child, Mr. and Mrs.
Haven became so much interested in the nurse, that they determined
if she would accept the situation of housekeeper in their family,
to take a house for the winter, as they had long wished to do. They
knew that she was exceedingly unwilling to be separated from
Harrison; and, as they intended to offer him a home, they were sure
this would be a great inducement for her to consent.

This arrangement was happily accomplished, and Mrs. Danforth was
delighted to acknowledge that she owed so comfortable a home to the
industry and good conduct of her son.

Harrison went regularly to school; but when at home he was always
ready to do anything in the family, and rendered himself so important
a part of the household, that Mr. Haven often declared he did not
know how they could do without him.

Alfred, as I have already mentioned, was at boarding-school about
twenty miles from the city.

His teachers had more than once notified his father, that unless
he would comply with the rules of the house and of the school,
he must be dismissed. Mr. Haven had plead with them to allow him
to remain, as he knew the discipline would be of great service to the
boy. He also used all the influence he possessed with the wayward
lad, threatening unless he would yield to authority to deprive him
of his allowance and other indulgences.

Alfred promised to amend; but before the first half of the term
had expired, he was expelled, one of the ushers being sent with him,
in disgrace to his father.

If Harrison had not cherished so great a dislike to the character
of this boy, Mrs. Danforth would have felt that she must remove him
from the house, so debasing did she consider Alfred's influence.
Indeed, his impudence and contempt of authority was so trying to his
parents that they could hardly endure the annoyance of his presence.
Too late they learned that unlimited indulgence, without parental
restraint, so far from making a child happy, only produces misery
for himself, and for all those connected with him.

Finding Harrison so much of a favorite with his parents and sister,
Alfred took every opportunity of insulting the boy, sneering at him
for being obliged to labor when out of school, often boasting that he
had never done an hour's work in his life.

On one of these occasions Mr. Haven was an unseen witness of the
treatment to which Harrison was subjected. The boy was blacking
a pair of boots, and whistling merrily at his work.

"Blackey, take that!" cried Alfred, giving him a kick. "You ought to
have a sign out, 'Shoes and whistling done here to order.' I suppose
you expect father to set you up in business that way; buy you a stand
and half a dozen bottles of 'Day & Martin.'"

At first, Harrison seemed inclined to return the kick by a blow
upon the face of Alfred with the boot which was stretched on his arm;
but, checking himself, went on whistling louder than before. Alfred
grew irritated; and, calling his companion by some of the vilest
names he could string together, he started forward to strike him,
when his uplifted arm was seized firmly by his father.

"Filthy boy!" he exclaimed, in great anger, "for once you shall feel
the power of the rod." He then commanded Harrison to go for his
horsewhip; and, notwithstanding the violent struggles of his child,
administered a sound chastisement. Then, after consulting with his
wife, he set out at once in search of a gentleman who had recommended
a situation for his son.

Back of the dining-hall was a small apartment which Mrs. Haven called
the housekeeper's room. In this apartment the mother and son could be
as retired as in their own home. There, after the duties of the day
were ended, Harrison sat with his books and slate, busy with his
school lessons, or receiving instruction from his mother.
Occasionally a timid knock announced the coming of Ella, who liked
nothing better than to sit by the side of her old nurse and listen
to her words of advice to her boy.

Mrs. Danforth seldom spoke of her husband, and seemed generally
cheerful and happy; but, one evening when Harrison went to her room,
he found her weeping bitterly. She had been allowing herself the
luxury of looking over some letters received from her husband
just before their marriage, and this had brought the trials of her
wedded, life most forcibly to mind.

"My dear boy," said she, trying to compose herself, "I have long been
considering whether you were old enough to profit by the story
of your father's life. While you remember so vividly the scenes
connected with his last days, I would impress upon you the cause
of all his—" she hesitated— "of all, I mean, that is painful for us
to think of. Your father, as perhaps you know, was an only child.
His mother loved him so fondly that she could not bear the thought
of his enduring any hardship. His father was an industrious man, and
wished his son to be taught to work. He used to set him a daily task
before he went to his own toil; but the boy would cry that it was
too hard for him; that he could not handle the axe, it was so heavy;
that the hoeing made his back ache; and so his too indulgent mother
performed the work for him, in addition to her own hard labor. Many
and many a time did she split and pile the wood her husband supposed
had been done by his son, while he passed the hours in idleness or in
play. As he grew up, and this could no longer be concealed from his
father, he complained of want of strength to do hard work, and begged
to be placed in a store in the village. Here he prided himself
upon being dressed better than any boy in town; and his frank,
handsome face and funny jokes caused him to be liked by all. In this
business he might have succeeded, for he was acknowledged to be
a good salesman; but soon he grew tired of the confinement; it was
too much like labor. He grew more and more inattentive to his
business, until he failed to give satisfaction to his employer, and
was dismissed from the place. From this time, for the next four
years, he was constantly changing from one employment to another,
never continuing but a short period at any one thing, but always
finding some reason in the heaviness of the work sufficient
to satisfy his weak-minded mother. His father remonstrated again and
again; but finally said he had done with the boy, and would never
advise him more, let him do what he would. I suppose nothing would
have satisfied her but to have him entirely exempt from care, and
ride about in a coach. She often told him he looked too much like a
gentleman to labor with his hands."

"At length his father died, and the property was divided between the
mother and son. We had been attached to each other about a year,
I thinking of nothing but the easy good nature and the handsome
appearance of my lover; but my parents had always opposed our being
engaged. They said, again and again, that a man who had never learned
to work, who had no habits of steady, daily toil, could not expect
the blessing of heaven; that he lived in constant violation of one
of God's first commands to man, 'By the sweat of thy brow thou shalt
eat bread'; that the Bible was full of denunciations against the
slothful and the sluggard. Oh! how many times my good father repeated
to me the words of Solomon, 'The slothful shall be under tribute':
'The soul of the sluggard desireth and hath nothing; but the soul of
the diligent shall be made fat': 'But if any provide not for his own,
and especially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith
and is worse than an infidel': 'This we commanded you, that if any
would not work, neither should he eat': 'Slothfulness casteth into a
deep sleep, and an idle soul shall suffer hunger': 'He that is
slothful in his work, is brother to him that is a great waster.'"

"I well remember one evening when I had sat with tears in my eyes
because my father had treated my lover coolly, that my mother tried
to prevail on him to consent to my wishes. Father took down the
Bible, and picked out a great many texts similar to those I have
repeated, and gave them to me to commit to memory. The next day
he met me walking sadly behind the house, and asked me, 'Dare you,
Julia, unite yourself with one who lives in constant violation of
God's command, "Six days shalt thou labor and do all thy work."'?"

"I, of course, made many excuses for my absent friend, and said that
I knew he wanted to find some steady employment; that he disliked
to be out of work as much as any one, but circumstances had not
favored him. He gazed in my flushed face earnestly for a minute, and
then said, 'O, my child! I'm afraid you're bringing sorrow and
affliction upon yourself! God's word never has failed, and it never
will!'"

The poor widow covered her face and wept. "Oh, how many, many times
those prophetic words have come back to me!"

"Father was a miller, and in a prosperous business. Every one of the
children had been brought up to labor at some regular employment.
About this time he wanted to build an addition to his mill. I noticed
that he went, for several days, to the widow Danforth's; but he said
nothing to me of his business there. One day he brought home
your father in the wagon, and told me that Henry was to put in a
certain sum, and become a kind of partner in the business; that he
had given his consent, if Henry would work regularly ten hours
every day for six months, we might be married.

"I was, as you may suppose, very happy, and very sanguine that my
lover would do all that my father wished. On account of being near
his work he was to board at our house; so that I had opportunity
to encourage him when his energies began to flag. Father said
nothing, but I noticed that he watched Henry closely; and I was
delighted when I found that the cordial, amiable temper of the young
partner began to have its effect.

"When I look back I can see that, but for this strict watching, and
perhaps my influence, he would have sold out his share in the mill
long before the time expired. But as it was, the season named
arrived, and we were married.  My father did well by me, and offered
to give Henry a larger share of the profits at the end of the year.
But, alas! before that time my dear father died, and died too,
knowing that all his prophecies for his daughter would be fulfilled.
Henry had returned to his old habits of idleness; and even I,
sanguine as I had been, began to have fearful misgivings about the
future.

"We moved to another town near by, and then to the city, where my
poor Henry seemed always to be in search of work; but, when he found
it, could never conquer his distaste for regular employment; and so
at last he came to fulfil the prophecy of Solomon, 'By much
slothfulness the building decayeth; and through idleness of the
hands, the house droppeth through.'"

"You will see now, my dear son, why I have been so earnest to have
you establish in early life a habit of industry, and to cultivate
a taste for daily, honest labor. No matter what employment you have,
if it is honorable employment. Remember your little verse,—"

"'For Satan finds some mischief still,
For idle hands to do.'"

"Remember, my son, any work is safe upon which you can ask the
blessing of your Heavenly Father."



CHAPTER VII.

HONEST COWLES.

"Work with your own hands, that ye may walk honestly toward them that
are without, and that ye may have lack of nothing."

TWO years swiftly glided away. Harrison I had now grown to be a stout
lad of twelve summers. In his looks he bore a strong resemblance
to his father, except that there was an expression of firmness and
decision which Mr. Danforth lacked. As Alfred was taller than he,
the clothes that he had out-grown were given to Harrison; and thus
he was kept well dressed, with little expense to his mother.

The friendship between Harrison and his young friend Ella grew
stronger every year. It was he who told her all the difficult words
in her reading lesson; and he, too, who again and again explained
the simple examples in arithmetic, to suit the youthful comprehension
of his young companion. When it was cold or muddy he always found
it convenient to go through three squares, in the opposite direction
from his school-house, for the purpose of carrying her satchel
of books.

Nor was Ella at all behind him in her favors. She kept him well
supplied with pen-wipers and invisible pin-cushions; and,
at New Years, presented him with a pair of slippers, which, if they
were not her own workmanship, were certainly her own selection, and a
showy pair they were too. At another time she gave him a game
of pictured cards, in which all kinds of trades were represented.
Mrs. Haven often remarked that they formed a picture of themselves,
as they sat at the little round table, with the cards spread out
before them, Ella in the fore-ground, kneeling in her chair to bring
herself on a level with her companion, every once in a while leaning
back, shaking her golden ringlets from her bright face, while she
indulged in a merry laugh at some arch expression of the other;
Harrison, with his deep blue eyes shaded by jet-black lashes,
his clear, rosy complexion and his frank, good-humored smile, dressed
in his neatly fitting clothes, and his neat, shining collar turned
down from his well-shaped neck, formed no unpleasant back-ground.

All this time Alfred had not once been home, though his father had
been several times to visit him. Sometimes he hoped there was
an improvement in the boy; and then, again, the teacher's report was
very discouraging. At any rate, it was not thought best to expose him
to the temptations of a city, even for ever so short a period.

At the end of two years came a sad change. Mr. Haven suddenly failed
in his business, owing to the villainy of one of his partners. This
so affected his spirits that he fell an easy victim to a prevailing
epidemic, and died, leaving his poor wife in a state bordering
on insanity, from the suddenness of the double shock.

Alfred came home to his father's funeral; but finding the restraints
of poverty too irksome, ran away and enlisted on board a ship for a
long voyage.

It was now that Mrs. Danforth had an opportunity to relieve her
grateful heart by kindness and care of her mistress. She tended her
through a long and dangerous illness, soothing her agitated nerves
by the precious promises of the Bible. Upon her recovery, she it was
who arranged the small cottage to which the widow had decided
to remove; who prepared the elegant furniture for sale; who bent her
own shoulders to bear the burden which would have fallen too heavily
upon the new-made widow. Nor was it until every arrangement had been
satisfactorily completed that she would leave one who confessed,
with tears, that she owed her more than her life; and this was the
blessed hope of once more meeting her husband, in that world where
there is no sorrow nor parting.

During the two years that she had passed under the roof of Mr. Haven,
her own and her son's expenses had been so slight that almost the
entire sum she had earned had been placed in safe keeping for future
use. She felt that she could well afford three months for the
gratuitous care of her friend; but now she must look around
for employment, and she hoped to obtain something so profitable as to
enable her to keep her son at school until his fifteenth year. He was
already such a proficient at accounts, that his late master
had advised her to place him in a store.

When it was known that Mrs. Danforth was willing to engage herself
once more as a nurse, she had abundant opportunities to do so.
She hired a pleasant room in the house of a friend, who consented
to board her son for the service he could render out of school hours.

The life of his father had made a deep and lasting impression
upon the mind of the boy. He could distinctly trace all the want
of success to his dislike of regular employment, and made many
resolutions to avoid idleness as a sure precursor of vice. He devoted
himself with new vigor to his books, that he might thus repay
his mother for her self-sacrificing exertions. He well knew that it
would be far more congenial to her feelings to hire a small tenement
and live with him in the most economical manner, rather than to be
constantly subjected to going among strangers; and that she would
have done this had it not been for her desire to have him spend more
time in the prosecution of his studies. Mrs. Danforth had in early
life received an excellent education, and therefore valued learning
as the open door to success.

The family in which Harrison was for a time to reside, consisted
of Mr. and Mrs. Cowles, one daughter, and two sons. They were
members of the same church as Mrs. Danforth, and their children,
though brought up in the city and surrounded by all the temptations
to vice which proved so fatal to many of their companions, still
retained the purity and freshness commonly considered the
characteristics of rural life. It had been the great desire
of Mr. and Mrs. Cowles to render their home so attractive that their
children would prefer it, after the labors of the day had ended,
to a stroll through the brilliantly-lighted streets, or a lounge
in some popular saloon.

"Young people must be taken once to the theatre, to bowling alleys,
to gambling saloons," say some, "in order that they may see the
extravagance, folly, and vice to which such places of amusement
lead." But not so thought these simple-minded Christians. They were
willing to believe that God could judge better for them than they
could do for themselves. They read from the inspired word, "Enter not
into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil men.
Avoid it; pass not by it; turn from it, and pass away;" and from such
commands they never departed.

The daughter, Mary Jane, was a bright, active girl, the delight
of her father's eyes. Occasionally she formed a slight acquaintance
with a young mechanic or clerk, who invited her to accompany him
to the theatre or some other place of fashionable resort. When she
sought the consent of her parents, they had but one reply: "If you,
my dear, can convince us that it does not come under the list
of those recreations which are forbidden in the Bible, or if we can
be sure that it will be a benefit to you in any way, we will consent;
otherwise you must be content to let us judge what is for your good."

Mr. Cowles had for many years been the head porter in one of the most
extensive mercantile houses in the city. When he and his wife first
left their country home in search of fortune, they were content
with two small rooms in the third story of a respectable house. They
were very poor; and, as they never went beyond their means,
never bought an article for which they could not pay at the time,
they were often really straitened. But the habits of regular,
industrious effort brought its reward. Mr. Cowles sought employment
on the wharves. He was ready to turn his hand to any honest labor.
He did not shrink from hard work. He never grumbled that he was
obliged to be up early in the morning or to work late at night.
When he obtained a job he took pains to do it well, to the
satisfaction of his employer; and his honest way of saying, "I hope
I've done it to your mind, sir," met with a ready response from those
who seldom bestowed praise.

One job well performed brought another; and honest John Cowles
had not worked on the wharf three months before he was preferred
beyond hundreds of others who had lounged about there years before
he was ever heard of.

After a while he was regularly employed to assist in unloading
vessels, shovelling coal, or carrying freight. He was very strong;
and the constant exercise of his strength rendered him still more so.
Then he was strictly honest, in the Bible sense of the word,—in his
business transactions preferring his neighbor's interests to his
own—so that among those who employed him he received the title
of "honest Cowles." This name always brought a flush of pleasure
to his countenance;-and he often said, "I would not exchange it
for the title of an emperor!"

In the mean time his wife struggled hard at her own work. She might
have obtained steady employment at a laundry; but this would take her
away from home from morning till night. The wages were better than
she could expect elsewhere; but, after anxious consultation with her
husband, she concluded it was her duty as well as her privilege
to keep the hearth-stone warm against his return from the arduous
labors of the day. So she kept their small house neat and tidy,
had his meals ready for him at the moment, and always received him
with a smile of welcome. Next she was advised to obtain sewing
from the slop-shops; but, after one week's trial, her husband would
not allow her to continue this employment.

Finally she was fortunate enough to obtain Washing for several
families, which she could do at home; and as her husband always found
time to bring water for her, and her clothes were hung upon the top
of the house, she found this very easy employment.

In the midst of the hardship of an uncommonly cold winter, Mary Jane
was born; and honest Cowles worked with renewed zeal. It was
with such pride he looked upon the tiny form, or ventured to take it
in his strong, rough hands, that his wife always laughed, and said
he handled it as he would a delicate piece of china. But however
awkward he might be in his embraces, they were the outflowings
of as warm and true a heart as ever beat.

After two years they moved into a small house by themselves. "Rather
smart for us," said honest Cowles; "but I guess I can meet the rent
when it comes due." Here they welcomed and reared their two boys,
until Mr. Cowles found himself nearly able to pay for a house
of his own. Some worthy gentlemen had invested their capital
in putting up a block of neat, comfortable tenements, suitable for
mechanics. They were encouraged to take the houses when they could
pay a part, and let the remainder lie upon mortgage, only paying
the interest of the money invested, which would be far less than the
ordinary rent. They would thus be enabled gradually to pay for the
whole house. Mr. Cowles went over the buildings, examined them
carefully, selected the corner tenement as the one he should
want—even made bold to ask his employer to step into it, and give him
the benefit of his advice.

"How much can you pay down?" inquired the gentleman.

"A trifle more than half," was the reply.

"You mean, then, for once," said his employer, "to depart from your
usual rule, and buy a house before you can pay for it."

Mr. Cowles looked troubled. This had been his only drawback.
"I feared," said he, "that the corner house, being considerably the
best one of the lot, would be taken up. Besides, there's a little
plat of green to be seen from the windows, and my wife would think
a deal of that."

"Then take it, by all means," urged the gentleman, turning away
to speak with a customer.

But honest Cowles did not take it, though the next morning
his employer offered to lend him the money to purchase the remainder.
"No," said he, "I don't like to begin to break over a good rule.
I'll run the risk of getting as good a one when I can pay for it."



CHAPTER VIII.

HARRISON LEAVING SCHOOL.

"The Lord . . . . blesseth the habitation of the just."

THOUGH we have made rather a long digression, yet we think,
the reader will be interested to know more of the family in which
our hero was to reside.

As his children grew up Mr. Cowles endeavored to instill into their
minds the principles which had governed his own life.

One evening, Warren, the oldest boy, was trying to write a
composition. He had finished his caption, and was leaning his head
on his hand, puzzling his brain as to how he should begin. His father
came and looked over his shoulder, and read, "Honesty is the best
policy."

"Honesty is the only policy, for the matter of that," he exclaimed.
"If you had seen as many persons as I have, try to work by some
other, and try cheating or lying as the best policy, you'd be
convinced they had no policy at all. Men don't want to be fooled
more than once. When they see you have overreached them, they are shy
of you ever afterwards. Or, if you are skilful at the business, and
they don't find you out for a little, why then it's so much the worse
for you; for you're just clapped into jail, and there's the end
of your story."

"But, after all," continued the old man, "policy is neither here nor
there. Policy isn't the rule we're required to go by. We've a higher
rule than that. We've the plain commands of God, right up and down.
You can't leap over them nor crawl under them. There they are, and
there they'll stand, strong as the everlasting hills."

Mr. Cowles, in his earnestness, had arisen, and was walking back and
forth across the room.

"I wish you wouldn't say it so fast, father," called the boy;
"I can't write half of it."

The mother smiled; but the father turned to his son and asked, "What
are you doing, Warren?"

"Writing a composition, sir."

"And what shall you do with it when it is done?"

"Write my name at the bottom, sir, and give it to the master."

"Write mine, you mean, my boy. Don't you see that if you write down
what I say, it will be my composition, not yours; and the master wont
thank you for the job of correcting mine, I reckon. No, Warren,
that's downright cheating, though I don't suppose you thought it."

"Come, boy!" said he, as the child began to cry, "there's no harm
done yet. You're welcome to all my ideas, only put 'em into your own
words. Isn't that it, wife?"

In this way, and under such discipline, Mary Jane, Warren, and John
grew up to be an honor to their parents, and a blessing to all
connected with them.

These worthy persons first formed the acquaintance of Mrs. Danforth
at the time of her sore affliction. Mr. Cowles was one of the
committee of the church to attend to similar cases of distress, and
his kind consideration for her at that season had won her entire
confidence and gratitude. They were, therefore, the first persons
to whom she applied for advice, after leaving the house
of Mrs. Haven, and it was with great willingness that they consented
to her proposal to take Harrison into their family.

John Cowles was nearly Harrison's age, but not as fax advanced in his
studies. This the latter much regretted, as he had just commenced
Algebra, and found it taxed his intellectual powers to the utmost.
Several times he was on the point of asking to be excused from this
lesson, but the thought that his mother would be disappointed checked
him. He knew if he were to ask her consent to this course, and tell
her, "I can't understand it, mother," she would say, as she had often
said before, "I know you don't, my dear. If you did, it would be
unnecessary for you to attend school. That is the very object you go
to school for, to learn to understand it."

Sometimes, however, Harrison puzzled a long time over the sum,
because he did not understand the principle involved. Then Warren
would come to his assistance, and explain the rule by which the
result could be gained.

One special advantage which the boy derived from being in this
family, was the privilege of attending, with his young friends,
a course of public lectures on scientific subjects. While Mr. Cowles
was exceedingly strict about many things, which he considered
of hurtful, or even of doubtful tendency, he spared no expense within
his means to afford them gratification in what he thought would be
of permanent benefit. He even allowed them many innocent amusements.

Since he had been able, he had, every year, hired a substantial
carriage and taken his entire family for a visit to his aged mother
in the country. These were occasions of jubilee to the reunited
household. Mr. Cowles often said he went back to the city
strengthened for any duty after feeling his mother's trembling hand
resting on his head, while she pronounced her fervent blessing.

It was Harrison's duty in this well-ordered family to cut kindlings,
carry coal, go to market, sweep the steps and side-walk, or perform
any of those multitudinous duties always necessary in a family
of six. These services had formerly been rendered by John, who now
assisted his father at the store.

In order to have time for a morning review of his lesson, our hero
arose early, so as to get through as much of his work as possible
before breakfast. Then he was by no means unmindful of his personal
appearance; and he liked to rub the door-plate, sweep and scrub
the steps before he should be likely to be recognized by any of his
acquaintance who might chance to pass. Then he could dress
for school, and go to market habited like a gentleman.

When Mrs. Danforth first noticed this trait in her son, she was much
distressed by it. She knew that he must be aware that he was
uncommonly attractive in his appearance, but she did not wish him
to attach any importance to the fact. She feared that he might be led
on by it, as his father had been, to consider honest labor beneath
him. Yes, as she reflected more upon the subject, she could see that
of late Harrison had appeared less humble, more proud and
self-reliant. She prayed earnestly that God would protect her boy
from sin, that he might see the folly of attaching importance to mere
outward appearance, and that his heart might be kept pure and humble
like that of a child.

Perhaps the peculiar circumstances of her own lot made her
over sensitive on this point, certainly it is a duty to be neat and
tasteful in dress, if we do not devote too much time and thought
to it.

Her Heavenly Father answered her prayer, though in a manner that she
dreamed not of.

About a fortnight later she returned home in a close carriage, about
a week before the time for which she had engaged was expired.
The good physician, whose acquaintance she first made in Ella's sick
room, soon followed, and peremptorily ordered her to take her bed
saying it was as true of nurses as of doctors that they made the
worst patients in the world.

When Harrison returned from school he found his mother in a high
fever, and was greatly alarmed to perceive that she did not appear
to recognize him. Mrs. Cowles, who had a moment before left the room,
found him standing by the bed side, large tears rolling down his
cheeks. She endeavored to soothe him; but the poor boy could not
shake off the fear that his beloved mother was to be removed from him
by death.

Fortunate, indeed, was Mrs. Danforth, to be placed in the midst
of such kind friends. Everything was done for her comfort as tenderly
and cheerfully as if she had been a mother or a sister. Then,
Harrison seemed suddenly gifted with the skill and experience
in nursing for which his mother had been so distinguished. He could
scarcely be persuaded to go from the room, and never left her
to sleep. He lay upon a couch at her side, and at her slightest call
was on his feet, wide awake, ready to administer to her comfort.

Ladies whom she had nursed constantly sent baskets of provisions,—
dainty little dishes to tempt her appetite,—while others came
in person to inquire for her, and to sit for a few hours by her
bed side.

The Saturday following her sickness was the first on which Harrison
had failed to visit Mrs. Haven and Ella in their suburban home.
Occasionally he stayed over night, and walked to church with them
in the morning, but generally only made a call of a few hours. On the
occasion in question, Ella watched at the window from two until five,
and then had a hearty cry when her mother convinced her it was too
late for him to come. The next morning, in church, her eyes were
constantly wandering to the humble slip in the gallery where
Mrs. Danforth hired seats for herself and her son. After the service
was through she whispered to her mother that she was sure Harrison
was sick, and begged that they might go through the street where he
lived and inquire for him.

They did so. And while Ella unwillingly accompanied Mary Jane
to church in the afternoon, Mrs. Haven remained to assist Mrs. Cowles
in the care of her very sick friend.

At the end of three weeks Mrs. Danforth sent her son to several
ladies to inform them that she regretted being unable to meet her
engagements with them. At the same time she confessed to her kind
physician her doubts whether she should ever again be well enough
to bear so much fatigue and loss of sleep as were necessary in the
faithful discharge of the duties of a monthly nurse. She acknowledged
that often, after being up through the night, she experienced such a
dizziness and languor that it was with difficulty she could rouse
herself; that the constant care which she felt for her patients, and
her sympathy with their sufferings, deprived her of her appetite, so
that at times she really loathed her food.

One mild day near the close of winter, more than a month from the
commencement of her illness, Dr.— called for her in his carriage;
and, having surrounded her with shawls and robes, drove away to the
cottage of Mrs. Haven, where his patient had promised to pass a few
days. This was the closing week of Harrison's term, and his teacher
had expressed a strong desire for him to be present. So he was not
to accompany his mother, though he much wished to do so; for he knew
that in this time she meant to decide somewhat upon her future
course.

For the last fortnight he had taken his books to his mother's room
and improved every spare moment in the review of studies upon which
he knew his class to be engaged, so that he was not so much behind
them as he had feared; and, as during the last week he gave his
undivided attention to his lessons, he was able to retain the high
stand he had heretofore maintained in his class.

As he stood forth to receive the medal awarded him, he little thought
that his schooldays were ended, that he should be numbered among that
happy band no more.

When he joined his mother on Wednesday evening, he found that her
ride, though so short, had proved too much for her strength, and that
she had not yet recovered from it. The evening was passed in
discussing plans for the future, and at length it was decided that
Mrs. Danforth should retain her room at Mr. Cowles's, together with a
small one in the rear, which they had kindly agreed to give her, and
that Harrison should endeavor to find a place in a store. Mrs. Haven
really urged the widow to remain with her until her health rendered
her able to work at her old employment, and Ella added her earnest
entreaties; but she was firm. If it was absolutely necessary,
she said, she would not resist their kindness; but she still had a
small sum left untouched; and while it was in her power she preferred
to be independent.

"I am old enough now," said Harrison, in a resolute tone, "to support
you, mother. I wish you would give up the thought of making vests,
except for me; I shall begin to wear them soon."

"Oh don't!" cried Ella, gazing at him with admiring eyes; "I'm afraid
you'll look just like a man!"

They all laughed, and Harrison assured her he was almost a man.

"I'm so sorry!" exclaimed the little girl, mournfully.

"Why?" inquired her mother.

"Because—because—" she hesitated, "because he has always been a boy
ever since I've known him; and I'm afraid when he's a man he won't
come running in at the gate, and laugh, and say, 'How do you do,
Ella?' and dig round my flowers, and say, 'Have you nothing for me to
do, Mrs. Haven?' I'm afraid he'll just come in and hold out his
finger so, for me to shake, and then sit down and read the newspapers
all the time he is here, as cousin Grason does."

"I promise you, I won't do that," answered Harrison proudly. "I shall
do exactly the same as I do now, except perhaps that I shall walk
instead of run. You know now I have so little time I want to improve
it to the utmost; so I don't loiter much on the way when I'm coming
out here."

Still Ella shook back her curls, and could not be persuaded to say
that she was not sorry.

"But," said her mother, "when Harrison is a man you will be a young
lady."

"And perhaps," suggested Mrs. Danforth, "you will not care to see him
then as you do now. He is just about to enter upon his great struggle
with life. He will have to work hard. Perhaps if you should meet him
some day with a carter's frock on, you would turn your head in the
other direction, and not like to have it known that you were
acquainted with him."

Harrison's face was crimson; but the little girl only laughed.
"You know very well I shouldn't do that!"

"How do I know?" he asked, seriously.

"Because you looked real funny when you were sitting in the
back-porch with your apron tied close around your neck, and that
little straw hat on; but I liked you just as well as I do now."

"You have argued the case fairly and won!" exclaimed her mother
laughing. "I had no idea she remembered that," she added, turning to
Mrs. Danforth. "It was more than three years ago. Why, she was not
five years old."

The little girl remained silent and thoughtful for a few minutes, and
then asked, "When I'm grown to be a woman, Harrison, if I'm poor,—
I mean very, very poor,—should you be ashamed to speak to me?"
She looked earnestly in his face, anxiously awaiting his reply.

"Why, Ella! you ought to know that I should like you all the same,
or rather better; though I should be sorry to have you very, very
poor, as you call it."

"What kind of business should you prefer?" inquired Mrs. Haven;
"I suppose you have some fancy about it."

"I had rather be a merchant," responded the boy, "if I could be a
good one, as your husband was."

"If he were living," exclaimed the lady, with deep feeling, "he would
be able to advise you, and probably could readily procure you
a place. I will do all in my power to assist you; but you know there
are difficulties attending good situations. For instance, in such
a house as my husband's, many a gentleman would be willing to pay
a handsome sum annually for the sake of having his sons learn the
business thoroughly."

"I know it!" cried Harrison. "Mr. Cowles says if Mr. Lothrop, where
he has worked so long, would take Warren into his store he would be
glad to have him work three years without pay. It would be the making
of him."

"But you have to support your mother," suggested Mrs. Haven,
playfully.

"Yes, ma'am; and for that reason I shall not apply for such a place.
I shall try to get in where they will give me a regular salary from
the very beginning. I am willing to work early and late; and it don't
cost us much for our food, does it, mother?"

Mrs. Danforth sighed, though presently she spoke, in a cheerful
tone,— "If I have my health, my son, I have no doubt we shall be very
comfortable."



CHAPTER IX.

HARRISON BECOMING A MERCHANT.

"In all thy ways acknowledge Him; and He shall direct thy paths."

MRS. HAVEN'S entreaties prevailed so far that her humble friend
remained at the cottage a week longer, while Harrison ran all over
the city, answering advertisements and looking about for a place.
Every morning he arose sanguine of success; and every evening
he reached the cottage, to report his entire failure.

Poor fellow! his faith almost failed. At the week's end he was quite
discouraged, because there seemed nothing further for him to do.

"Never despair!" said his mother. "If you cannot do one thing you can
do another."

"I suppose there are places enough," responded the boy; "but I
wouldn't go to them."

"Why not?" inquired his mother.

"I wouldn't go into a bar-room, nor into a restaurant for any
salary," replied the boy.

"I hope not," said his mother, anxiously; "but cheer up; we may hear
of something to-morrow."

"So I've said to myself every day for a week!" responded the
poor boy.

"Never mind!" cried Ella, soothingly, "mamma says I shall be rich
some time; and I'll get a nice house, and we'll all live together
in it; and you shant have such a weary time, running round after
places, and keeping me watching at the windows to tell your mother
whether you have found one or not."

"I suppose you don't know Ella can tell as soon as she sees you
whether you have been successful," suggested Mrs. Haven, playfully.

"Didn't I tell right every time?" urged the child.

"But how?" inquired the youth.

"Why, you walked along, and when you came near the gate you stopped,
as if you did not like to come in. Then, when I ran to the door,
you said, 'How do you do, Ella?' and did not look at me, but walked
along and hung up your cap, and did not smile. I knew that if you had
found a place, you would come jumping along, and, as likely as not,
spring right over the gate; then you would catch hold of my hand, and
say, 'O, Ella! I've some good news for you; where's mother? and you'd
run and put your arms round her neck, and kiss her ever so many
times."

In spite of his despondence, Harrison had a hearty laugh, in which
Mrs. Haven and his mother joined.

"She watches you closely, you see," said the lady.

"If I were to be here one night more, I'd act so you couldn't tell,"
said the boy.

"Oh, do stay! please do," urged the child; "will you, Mrs. Danforth,
dear nurse, just to please me?"

"And to please me," rejoined the lady. The good nurse consented;
indeed, how could she resist such fond entreaties.

So Harrison went forth the next morning for another day's toil. Would
it be fruitless toil?

This was the important question which agitated poor Ella's breast;
and by four o'clock, she stationed herself at the front window, from
which she could see some distance up the street. Her mother advised
her to take a book, or some work, or the time would seem very long.
She took a story-book in hand; but her eyes were continually
wandering from her page to the window.

Half-past five arrived; the latest hour at which he had ever been
away. Ella was sure now that he had not been successful. "If he had
found a place," she said, "he would have hurried home to tell us so."
At length she saw him walking toward the house. He seemed inclined
to hurry; but Ella thought that was because he feared he should
detain them from tea. He glanced up at the window, held down his head
as he passed through the gate, turned deliberately about and latched
it, then advanced toward the house. Ella met him at the door, and
looked earnestly in his face. There was a curious expression which
puzzled her. He held out his hand without raising his eyes. She could
restrain herself no longer. "Oh, I'm so sorry, Harrison!" and she
walked slowly before him into the room where her mother and his
were awaiting them.

"He hasn't found a place, mamma," she began, in a mournful tone.

"Does he say so?" inquired Mrs. Danforth, gazing earnestly at him.

"No, indeed," exclaimed the boy, throwing off his disguise: "You're
mistaken for once, Miss Ella. I've found a place, a first-rate one,
I think. Any how, it's in a large grain store on. Central wharf,
with vessels coming up to it and unloading all the time. I'm to have
thirteen dollars the first month; and after that, if I do well,
they are going to increase my wages. I mean to do well; and perhaps
some time, I shall get into the firm."

The boy's handsome face flushed with pride as he already,
in imagination, saw himself seated at one of the high desks, calling
clerks, giving orders, filling out cheeks, as he had seen his new
employers do on that very day.

"What do you say, Ella?" he asked, as she stood silently by his side.

"I'm very glad." The answer was in rather a doubtful tone.

"Only you didn't think I could deceive you so. I would not have done
it except in joke; and you know I gave you fair warning last night."

Ella smiled faintly, but made no reply.

"Come to the window," exclaimed the boy. "Now play I'm just coming
home."

He seized his hat and ran down the walk. Presently she saw him
leaping along as if he were almost beside himself with joy. He did
not forget to jump over the gate, and the little girl laughed most
heartily as she ran to open the door.

"O, Ella! my dear Ella!" he cried out. "Do come with me to mother,
I've something splendid to tell; oh such good news! oh dear, dear!"
and he ran along through the hall into the dining-room.

"Is that right?" he inquired, as soon as his laughing would allow him
to speak.

"Yes, exactly right," was the delighted reply.

"Well, I suppose that is just the way I should have done, if you had
not put me up to playing a joke upon you."

"Come! come!" said Mrs. Haven, "Mrs. Danforth and I have waited quite
long enough for our tea."

"O Harrison!—what a very funny boy you are!" exclaimed Ella as she
seated herself opposite him at the table.

In the evening Mrs. Danforth requested her son to give an account
of his day's adventures.

"I went first," he began "to our room at Mrs. Cowles's. He had just
come home to prepare to go to some committee meeting. I told him
I was almost discouraged trying to get a place. He called me into his
dressing room and made me give him an account of what I had done
while he was shaving. Then he said, 'I must go right away now, to be
in time for my business, but come in at noon, and if you have not
found any place before that time, perhaps I can put you in a way
to succeed. Don't be too sanguine though,' he said, as I suppose he
saw how relieved I was. 'Do the very best you can for yourself,
for maybe my plan will end in smoke.'"

"So after running in for a moment to tell Mrs. Cowles and Mary Jane
we were coming back to-morrow, I again started forth to seek
my fortune. Before I had gone far, I met Mr. Clarkson. He was very
glad to see me, and almost the first question he asked, was, 'And how
is our little friend Ella Haven? I suppose you see her occasionally.'
'I saw her this morning,' I answered. 'She speaks of you very
often.'"

"I'm glad you told him that," cried Ella, clapping her hands.

Harrison smiled and went on. "I told him I was trying to look up
a place in a store, and had been trying for more than a week."

"'Let me think,' he said, 'let me think if I can't do something
for you'—scowling in his old way, you know, Ella."

"Oh, yes!"

"'Rather an unlucky time to be out of a place, my boy. The fact is,
there's a terrible crisis ahead. Many of our wisest politicians
predict a great crash in the commercial world. Our merchants have
traded largely, more than their capital would warrant; there is
too much show and too little reality; and things will have to come
down to a more solid basis. Are you set upon the business of trade?
Why not be a mechanic or an engineer, or something of that sort?
Well,' said he, as I shook my head, 'perhaps you'll talk differently
in the course of a year. I'll look around though, and see what I can
do for you. If Mr. Haven were alive, he would get you a situation,
perhaps giving you a chance in his own store.'"

One part of the conversation with Mr. Clarkson the boy omitted, as it
related to Alfred the wayward son.

"After I left him," he continued, "I determined to begin at one end
of ——— Street, and go into every store in it. Sometimes my heart beat
so I thought I never could get across the long buildings into the
office in the rear where the owner generally sits. Sometimes they
would say, 'More boys now than we can employ.' Others would merely
stop writing a moment, as I asked, Do you need a boy in your store,
sir? and shake their heads and others still, would ask, 'Who are you
references?' I thought they might have remembered a little how they
felt when they were boys.

"At last, just before dinner, I found one gentleman who seemed very
kind. He asked my name and age, whether I had been brought up in the
city. He seemed quite pleased when I told him I had been in Alfred T.
Haven's family for two years. 'I knew him well,' he said, 'a noble
man.' Then he asked if I had studied book-keeping, and how far I had
advanced in arithmetic. I pulled out my medal which was suspended
around my neck, and told him it was my prize for success
in mathematics. He went and talked for a few moments with another
man, and then came back again. 'I'm really sorry, my boy,' he said,
'but my partner has engaged a lad this very day.' I could have cried
I was so disappointed, and liked the looks of the gentleman so much.
I was just going out when he said, 'It may be we shall have another
vacancy. If we do, where shall I address you?'

"'At Mr. John Cowles's, sir; mother and I live in his house.'
He smiled again. 'But it is necessary for me,' I said, 'to get
a place at once. I must support my mother, sir.' He seemed to hate
to let me go, but gave me his hand and said, 'God bless you, my boy.
I wish I had seen you a few hours earlier, I should like to help
a boy who supports his mother.'"

"I went out of his counting-room quickly for fear he would see the
tears in my eyes, and walked straight to Mr. Cowles. I couldn't bear
the thought of going into another store."

"What was the name of the gentleman?" asked Mrs. Haven, who had been
listening with great interest.

"The firm was Lombard & Lamb, on ——— Street. I don't know which of
the partners it was."

"Did he wear glasses?" inquired the lady. "No, ma'ma; the other one
did. He was a little bald, and his whiskers were quite gray. The
other one was younger."

"That was Mr. Lombard then. I wish he had taken you. He is very rich,
and was a principal owner in the block in which Mr. Cowles lives.
I think Mr. Cowles purchased of him."

"They had company to dinner; and I didn't say anything about him
there," said Harrison, "I was so anxious to hear his plan, as he
called it. He took his hat after dinner, and said, 'I'll go with you
as far as M— Street.' He left me standing on the sidewalk ever so
long, I thought it was an hour, and then led the way down to Central
wharf. 'Is Mr. Grant in?' he asked."

"'Not back from dinner,' answered one of the clerks in a grum voice."

"'How soon will he return?' asked Mr. Cowles."

"'In fifteen minutes.' 'We'll wait then,' he said, turning to me."

"Pretty soon Mr. Grant came; and Mr. Cowles talked with him some
time, and kept pointing to me. I could only hear one sentence, and
that was from our good friend, mother: He loves work, sir, and has
been brought up to it.'"

"The gentleman then came up to me and said, 'If you'll wait awhile
I'll talk with you.' So I walked around the store, up and down
stairs, and stood at the great windows where they take in goods from
the vessels, until he sent a clerk for me; and you know the rest."

That night, after Harrison was in bed, his mother came in to bid him
good-night. "I hope, my son," she said, "that you have not retired
to rest without thanking your Father in heaven for his blessing
upon your endeavors to-day."

The lad colored under his mother's anxious gaze. "I said my prayers,
of course, mother," was his hesitating reply. "Perhaps. I didn't
remember to thank Him as I ought."

"God loves a greatful heart," was her only remark.



CHAPTER X.

THE SECRET PARTNER.

"It is joy to the just to do judgment; but destruction shall be to
the worker of iniquity."

THE events related in the last chapter occurred on Thursday. Harrison
was to take his place in Mr. Grant's store on Monday. The next day,
then, his mother must be carried home, and all the arrangements made
for her comfort during his absence. As the youngest boy, he must be
the first at the store in the morning to sweep and dust; then return
for his breakfast, and be back again to his work. In the morning,
therefore, he could do nothing to lighten her cares. But the store
closed early, and what delightful evenings they would have together!

Those were the boy's reflections as he lay awake long after the other
inmates of the cottage had sunk into quiet slumber. "Mother says
I ought to be thankful and I am; but not in the way she means,
I suppose. I wish I were as good as she is. Nothing ever happens
to her but she sees the hand of God in it, just as plain as I can see
that bureau in the moonlight. If it's any thing she has asked for,
He has answered her prayer, she says. If it's any affliction, He is
administering the rod in love, for her good. Then how much comfort
she does take in praying! Now last night she seemed to forget
everything but that she was talking with God. I confess I was
so  tired I lost a part of it, my thoughts wandered so, but when
she arose, how her face did shine! She seemed so full of trust,
when she kissed me good-night and whispered, 'All will come out
right, my son.'"

Monday morning arrived, and Harrison went to his new employment full
of hope, sanguine of success, because he had made up his mind to do
his very best. One of the clerks explained the duties that would be
required of him. First, he would be expected to take the great key
at a very early hour from the house of Mr. Grant, and carry it to the
porter at the store. Then, when within the store, he was to sweep and
dust, return home for his breakfast, and be back in time to take the
letters from the morning mail, after which he would be called upon
to go errands here and there, and if found trustworthy, to deliver
and collect bills.

When he returned home at night, Mr. Cowles was almost as eager as his
mother to hear his report of the day.

"I am very well satisfied with my place," said the boy, "and am
exceedingly obliged to you, sir, for helping me to get it. We are
doing an immense business. I can't begin to tell you the amount
of grain we have received into the store to-day. The hook and chain
are fastened around the draw, and up go several bushels, straight to
the third or fourth story window, where a man, stands ready to pull
them in, and others to mark them and pile them away."

"Then perhaps in an hour comes a tremendous great order to be filled,
and down come bags again through the trap-door into the lower room,
from which the men take them into the trucks backed up to the
sidewalk."

At the end of two months Mrs. Danforth began to notice that her son,
instead of being cheerful and happy, came home with languid steps,
complained of being weary, and was not at all inclined to talk of his
business. The night he brought home his first month's wages, he laid
the money down with a petulant air, very unlike himself, and when his
mother glanced inquiringly in his face, exclaimed to her great
astonishment, "I wish that were the last cent I ever were to receive
from the firm of Grant & Company."

"Why, Harrison! what has happened?" she inquired in surprise.

"Because I believe they'll fail," said the boy, recovering himself.
"I don't think they do business on the right principle."

The good woman begged him to explain. This he was unwilling to do;
and then she told him if he did his own duty faithfully, he was not
responsible for the actions of his employers.

Two, three months passed; and Harrison grew more and more silent—
almost moody. Not even good neighbor Cowles could induce him to say
a word about his business. He worked early and late, often not coming
home for his supper until eight or nine o'clock, so that his mother
had but little opportunity to question him. On the Sabbath, however,
she noticed a marked change in his conduct. He often sat with his
eyes fixed vacantly on some object; and when suddenly addressed,
would start as if awaking out of his sleep. Once when she pressed him
as to the subject of his thoughts he answered, vaguely, "I'm trying
to make out the character of the head clerk." He had long ago given
up identifying himself with the business, and saying "our firm,"
"our business," "our clerks." On another occasion she overheard him
say to himself, "I'll keep my eyes opened, and make it out yet."

All this time he had visited Mrs. Haven's cottage but once. Ella had
been in several times to inquire for him, and felt quite indignant
at his having forsaken them, until Mrs. Danforth explained to her,
with a sigh, that his business allowed him no time for recreation,
scarcely for necessary rest. And when Ella asked, "Does he like being
a merchant? does he look just as he did? does he whistle now?"
the good woman was obliged to confess that he seemed rather
overworked, and consequently not so merry as formerly. Ah! she little
knew the struggle that was going on in the mind of her boy; that when
at a late hour he retired to bed he could not sleep, that a heavy
weight of care lay upon his heart! But I will not anticipate.

It was now July. Many of the more wealthy citizens were leaving
for the sea-side, or for their country-seats; but though the heat
was extremely oppressive, Harrison's energies did not flag. On the
contrary he had seemed for a short time more active and busy
than ever. For two days he had carried his breakfast and dinner
with him, so that he was absent from home from half-past five in the
morning till past eight at night. When his mother remonstrated,
he assured her that he had extra labors to perform in the absence
of one of the accountants. Mr. Grant finding he could do the work,
had imposed it upon him in addition to his own.

One morning, however, he returned to breakfast, and, having asked
to see Mr. Cowles, walked up to him with the inquiry, "What is the
name of the gentleman who is in company with Mr. Grant?"

"I don't know," replied the other, gazing with considerable surprise
upon the flushed, earnest countenance of the youth.

"Can you help me find out, sir."

"I suppose so, if it is any object for you to know."

"It is of the utmost consequence, sir. When will you do it?"

"To-day."

"Thank you, sir. I'll call at dinner time," and the excited boy went
from the house forgetting that he had not eaten his breakfast.

He returned, however, at dinner-time, and having dispatched his meal
in haste went to Mr. Cowles sitting-room and knocked at the door.
The family were eating in the basement; but our good friend, hearing
Harrison's voice, kept the table; and, entering the room, gave him
the information he sought. "I asked my employer," he began, "who said
he supposed it was Kilby."

"That's just what I thought," exclaimed the boy, with a great sigh
of relief.

Mr. Cowles stared. "Mr. Loving," he added, "was curious to find out
my object in inquiring; but I told him I only sought information
for a friend."

"'Hold,' said he, 'I'll inquire of Clement, next door. He's booked up
in all those matters.' In about five minutes he returned and said
it was Kilby, a rich man from the West somewhere."

"Yes, it's L. F. Kilby," repeated the boy, turning to go. "Well,
I've found out so much."

"What's in the wind, my lad?" asked the good man.

"You'll know soon," was the reply.

All that afternoon Harrison worked as if for his life. Since the
sickness of the accountant, his competency to fill the vacancy
had been discovered, and his employer, who had noticed his redoubled
exertion, supposed that he was trying to obtain the place, for the
sake of the higher wages. He smiled as he advanced, and looking over
the shoulder of the lad, saw him neatly and accurately copy
the accounts from the day-book into the journal, little imagining
that, as soon as his back was turned, another set of accounts,
totally unlike these, were drawn from beneath the book and copied
with a rapid hand.

At length the boy's arduous, self-imposed task was completed. He had
worked at it early and late, mostly when the store was empty, while
Mr. Grant and the greater part of the men had gone to their meals,
and now he considered that enough had been accomplished to serve
his purpose. At noon, before he left the store, he sought the head
clerk, from whom he generally received orders, and said, "I should
like to be absent this afternoon, sir."

"Well, you do look rather used up," replied the man, glancing at
his pallid countenance. "Hope you ain't going to be sick; can't spare
you."

"I've had to work very hard for a mouth, doing double duty," replied
Harrison, fixing his clear, keen eye upon the other. "Can I have
leave of absence?"

"Oh yes! I think upon the whole you need a little rest," was the
reply, and the boy waited for nothing further.

Mrs. Danforth noticed that he ate very sparingly, and soon retired
to his room, where he dressed himself in his Sunday suit.

"Where are you going, my dear?" she asked, in surprise.

"To Mr. Clarkson's first," was his reply. "I have leave of absence
for the afternoon."

"It is very warm," she urged. "Why can't you wait awhile?"

He hesitated a moment, as if about to say something, and then
went out as if he had not heard her remark. But presently he came
back, and said, "Mother, I have something very painful to do this
afternoon, and I want you to pray for me, that I may be directed
to do what is right. I can't tell you now, but I shall before long,
and then I hope I shall be happy again."

"O, my son! what can it be! I hope you have not been left to do
wrong. O, Harrison! tell me, whatever it is! I had rather know it
at once. I can't endure the suspense."

"I will tell you to-night, mother. Please pray for me till then."
And he went out leaving her crushed almost to the dust with sorrow,
fearing that her darling boy, her only earthly hope and dependence,
had been left to commit some great crime. Yes, she saw it all;
she realized now that his plea of urgent business at the store
was but an excuse to be away from home, where the stings
of conscience were doubly hard to endure. She retired to her own
closet, and, falling on her knees, cried out in agony, "O, my God!
forgive him, whatever he has done; lead him to repent humbly, and to
begin this very day a new life!"

Then she tried to recall his exact words, "Pray, for me that I may be
directed to do what is right." He was about then to confess
his guilt, and that was why he hoped for happiness afterwards.
But why go to Mr. Clarkson. Alas! all was dark and drear, and
shrouded in mystery. Sometimes she thought she would follow her son
to Mr. Clarkson's, and force from him the dreadful truth. She passed
the time in alternate prayers and groans and tears.

If Harrison had not been so much absorbed, he would have relieved
his mother so far as his own conduct was concerned, if he thought
the time had not arrived to tell her the whole truth. But, conscious
of his own innocence, he did not realize her anxiety for him.

He went first to Eagle Hotel, and requested to see Mr. Clarkson.
The gentleman learning that he had something for his private ear,
led him along the hall to a small parlor in a retired part of the
building.

"Here is my sanctum," he said, playfully, "and I am quite curious
to know why you have brought me into it."

"Mr. Clarkson," said the boy, pale with contending emotions, "You
have always been kind to me. I need advice, and I know no one so able
to give it as you. May I tell you my story?"

"Certainly," responded the gentleman, growing every moment more and
more surprised.

"Well, sir," exclaimed the boy, nervously handling a small roll he
held in his hand. "I will make it as short as I can."



CHAPTER XI.

HARRISON'S STORY.

"Be sure your sins will find you out."

"FOR six months," began Harrison, "I have been in the store of Grant
& Co., on Central Wharf."

Mr. Clarkson started, stood for a moment irresolute, and then sat
down again.

"I was engaged to do the work of a boy, and was to have thirteen
dollars a month, with a promise of increase of wages if I did well.
You know I am not afraid of work; and I tried to do my very best.
It was just such a store as I had longed to be in, and at first I was
delighted with my situation."

Harrison sighed heavily and then went on. "As errand-boy I was around
in all parts of the store, and one day I overheard Mr. Grant swearing
terribly at the head clerk. They were alone in the office. I suppose
he did not realize that any one could hear him. I was dreadfully
frightened, and stood still. The clerk, whose name is Ransom,
answered him back in the same angry tone, 'I'll expose you then.'"

"'And criminate yourself,' said Mr. Grant."

"'Kilby will forgive that, for exposing your villainy,' retorted the
clerk."

"I crawled softly away and went up stairs. What could they have
meant? At first, I could only imagine that the life of some one was
in danger; but, after lying awake almost all night over it,
I determined to be on my guard and watch the actions of my employer."

"A part of my duty was to clear the office of rubbish, which had
accumulated through the day. Newspapers and old letters were
generally crumpled and thrown under the table, to show they were
of no further use. These I gathered in a basket and carried away
to the place assigned them. One day I wanted a piece of paper, and,
having noticed that often there was a half-sheet thrown under the
table, I went and selected one which had only a few words written
on it. It was the beginning of a letter addressed to L. F. Kilby,
Esq. Then, in the first line, a word was misspelled, and the whole
was thrown aside. The next piece I took was this letter, which had
been copied but not filed. Hardly knowing what I was doing, I began
to read, but was just going to throw it aside when my curiosity was
roused by these words: 'Trade still dreadfully dull. Haven't sold a
hundred bushels for a week. Mr. Ransom has concluded to take the
front store, as I wrote in my last, for storage. He has some scheme,
a wild one I fear. I waited for your answer till the last moment,
hoping you would veto the bargain; but, as' —This too," added
Harrison, "for some reason was left incomplete. I put it in my
pocket."

"During the week of which he spoke we had been sending off immense
quantities of wheat, corn, and other grains. I began to understand
the game. All this time I was very much excited, and lost my
appetite. I didn't know what it was my duty to do. I suppose I felt
worse in consequence of knowing that Mr. Haven's partner had ruined
him, and caused his death. I used to see Mr. Grant open his office
door and beckon Mr. Ransom in. Sometimes I used to loiter up near
the partition, so as to hear what they were saying.

"One day I heard Mr. Grant say, 'I'm afraid he's got wind of it.
He'll pounce right upon us some day.'"

"'We must prepare for him,' said the clerk, in an indifferent tone."

"'How is it possible to do it?' asked the other."

"'Why, by a false set of books,' suggested Mr. Ransom."

"I had access to all the books, as well as to the safe, for the key
I always left with the store-key at Mr. Grant's house. After this
I noticed that Mr. Ransom was very much engaged in writing and the
accountant was required to copy from this day-book into another which
he calls the journal."

"One day he did not make his appearance; and the clerk, after sending
to his boardinghouse, and finding that he was ill, asked me if I
could post the accounts for the day. I answered that I could, if he
would explain to me his method. This he did in a few minutes; and, as
the book-keeper has not returned, I have done his work ever since,
in addition to my own."

"Perhaps you do not comprehend that the books I was required to keep
were the false ones I had heard spoken of."

Mr. Clarkson arose suddenly, and going to the door, said, "Excuse me
one moment," and left the room.

"I'm afraid I'm keeping you too long, sir," said Harrison, anxiously,
as the gentleman returned; "but I am almost through now."

"Oh no!" responded the gentleman, "I'm entirely at your service.
I'm quite curious to know what the gentlemen intend to gain by these
books while they still retain the genuine ones."

"That is just it, sir. One day, Mr. Grant and the clerk were in the
office, supposing all the men had gone to dinner, and got to
disputing very angrily on that subject. Mr. Grant wanted to destroy
them, but the other wouldn't consent to it. They called each other
all kinds of hard names; but at length agreed that the books should
be boxed up and sent to a place of security."

"I suppose, then," suggested Mr. Clarkson, "that Mr. Ransom wished
to hold these as a proof of the villainy of the other, in case he
turned against him."

"Yes, sir; and also to prove his own part of the profits, in case
they are not found out."

"Oh yes! Well, go on."

"I have nothing more to tell, sir; only that I have seized every
opportunity to copy a few pages from the real books,—enough to
compare with the books which will be presented Mr. Kilby, if he
should inquire for them."

"Are you willing to take your oath that these are correct?" asked Mr.
Clarkson, advancing and taking the sheets from the boy's hand.

"I am willing, sir," answered the boy, seriously, "to take my oath
that they are correct in dates and figures, and in every particular
and respect, as far as I was capable of making them so."

"Well, then, come with me to a magistrate."

"What will it be necessary for me to do, sir?"

"Simply to state in brief what you have said to me, and take your
oath upon it."

"If you think best, I will go; my only object has been that justice
should be done to Mr. Kilby."

"I wish poor Haven had had such a clerk," sighed the gentleman.
"Remain here a moment, and I will accompany you."

Harrison, when left alone, began to feel a reaction from the
excitement. He leaned his head on the table; and, when Mr. Clarkson
returned, after an absence of about fifteen minutes, he found him
faint and languid. A good cup of coffee, however, soon revived him,
and they set out for the office of the attorney.

When they arrived, two gentlemen were seated there; and Mr. Clarkson,
having shaken hands with them, stated his business, and requested
Harrison to repeat the substance of what he had said to him.

The lad began, and the cross-questioning of the lawyers, as he
thought them, brought out the rest.

When he produced his roll containing the sheets copied from the
books, one of the gentlemen caught his hand, and exclaimed, "Noble
boy! you have helped me to unmask the villains, and you shall be well
rewarded."

Harrison stared at him in astonishment.

"This is Mr. Kilby," said Mr. Clarkson; "so you can imagine that he
has listened to your story with some interest."

The secret partner then inquired if Harrison would return to the
store that afternoon.

"No, sir," replied the boy, drawing himself up to his full height;
"I shall never go there again. I should have left at the end of a
month, but for the hope of being able to prove something against
them, as I was sure they were meditating some crime."

"Which you have well done," said the lawyer; "and I advise you not to
leave your work incomplete."

"Go, as usual, to your business in the morning," added Mr. Kilby;
"and when the safe is open, keep the key in your own possession.
It may be that the old books have not yet been removed; or, if they
have been, try to ascertain to what place. They will be so taken
by surprise to see me, they may betray themselves. If so, it will be
unnecessary to have you appear connected with the affair."

Poor Harrison was really very unwilling to show himself at the store,
after what he had done. It seemed to him like deception. Mr. Ransom,
and indeed, Mr. Grant, had always been kind to him. On his own
account he bore them no ill-will and nothing but his desire to save
one whom they were trying to ruin, would have induced him to conduct
as he had done. Then the reaction, from his excitement and hard labor
at the store, was coming on. He felt as if he would like to lie down
and sleep for a week.

The gentlemen, however, overruled all his objections; and Mr. Kilby
promised him rest after to-morrow. The arrangements for the morning
were then agreed upon, and Harrison left them to hasten home.

Notwithstanding his head was aching severely, his heart was so much
lightened of its heavy load that he sprung up the stairs, and entered
the room with a smile of pleased anticipation. He knew his mother
would be gratified at the course he had pursued.

She was sitting in a low chair at the table, upon which lay the open
Bible. Little imagining that she was strengthening her heart to bear
some great sorrow, he advanced and put his arms around her neck as in
days long gone by. "O, mother!" he exclaimed, kissing her cheek,
"I feel like myself once more. Such a burden as I have carried for
six long, weary months. I would not surely bear it again for—
for anything—short of duty, of course, I mean."

Mrs. Danforth burst into tears. "O, my son!" she sobbed out, "tell me
that you have never departed from the instructions of this holy book;
I care for nothing else."

"I cannot say that," he replied, in a subdued tone; "for you have
taught me that we do depart from God's commands every hour; but I can
relieve you at once with regard to the present case. It does not at
all concern myself, except as I have been the means of exposing the
villainy of two rogues."

"You, Harrison! You are young for such business."

"Yes, mother, and therefore unsuspected; but please give me some
supper, and I will tell you the whole story. Here, let me wipe your
eyes, and see you smile once more. I am sorry I did not tell you all
from the beginning. Mr. Cowles must hear it too. I wonder whether he
suspected what I was about?"

It had been agreed by Mr. Kilby and the lawyer that Harrison's first
business at the store should be to ascertain whether the old books
had been removed. Upon opening the safe, he found that they were
taken out, and the new ones arranged neatly in their places. He was
much disturbed at this, and walked to the front of the store,
reflecting what he should do. Among a pile of bags of grain his eyes
rested for a moment upon a square box, nailed up and directed
to William Ransom, Calender street. His heart beat wildly as his eye
measured the size to compare it with the books. Ho was almost sure
it contained them.

The truckman would be here soon with his team. How should he contrive
to detain it? Seizing a favorable moment, when the porter
was employed at another part of the store, he attempted to lift the
box, but found it required the exertion of all his strength to convey
it ever so short a distance. He relinquished at once the idea of
carrying it up stairs; but merely opened a door near by, leading into
a closet used for rubbish, pushed it in and threw a basketful
of papers over it.

It was unnecessary now to retain in his possession the key of the
safe; and therefore he proceeded in his usual business, after writing
on a scrap of paper, "All safe; search closet,—right hand of office,—
for square box;" or some word to signify his success, he had been
directed to give Mr. Kilby or the police who would accompany him,
on their entrance to the store. All his anxiety now was lest some
inquiry should be made for the books by Mr. Ransom before Mr. Kilby
should appear; but he comforted himself that even in that case
he could direct them to Mr. Ransom's room in Calender street.

Presently the truckman came in to take the grain which had been left
on the floor over night. He looked around a moment for the box, and
then said to Harrison, who was the only one in sight, "Mr. Ransom
told me to carry a box to Calender street. He said he'd leave it
here, marked and directed; won't you tell him I didn't find it, and
I'll take it next time."

"If he wants to send it then, I suppose he'll have it ready," replied
the youth, gravely.

Scarcely ten minutes after the load of grain had left the store,
Mr. Ransom made his appearance, and Harrison noticed his quick glance
in the direction from which the box had been taken. He desired now
to ward off any attention to himself; for he trembled with
apprehension of some violence on the part of the guilty men. He bent
over his writing, that his palid face might not attract notice,
though his brain absolutely refused to do its usual work of posting
accounts. Every moment he grew more excited. He felt oppressed for
breath, and walked to the door for air.

Fortunately for him, Mr. Grant and his clerk were shut close in their
office, concerting measures to insure themselves against exposure,
if, as they feared, the secret partner should present himself or send
an agent to investigate the state of the firm. How little they
thought that a net had been woven around them which, in a few
moments, would enclose them in its folds.

Just as Harrison reached the door, he saw Mr. Kilby and two
policemen, standing in close counsel just at the corner of the
street.

Advancing quickly toward them, he put the paper into their hands,
turned back, and was, apparently, writing at his desk, when they
entered.

Mr. Kilby presently appeared at the door, alone, and advancing toward
the office, inquired, in a loud, cheerful voice, of the young clerk,
"Good morning! is Mr. Grant in?"

"He is, sir!" replied Harrison, in an almost inarticulate voice, and
then proceeded to call the gentleman from his office. But that
familiar voice had penetrated the closed door; and, hastily casting
a glance around to the safe to see that all was in order, Mr. Grant,
with a certain wildness of the eye, but a braggadocio air, walked
forward to meet his partner.

I do not intend to describe the scene which followed. The officers
entered, and served a writ upon Mr. Grant and his clerk; and, as it
was a criminal prosecution, for fraud, on behalf of the government,
no bail was allowed, and the villains were carried to prison to await
their trial. Upon examination, all the bags of grain in the fourth
story were marked with the letter R, so that in case an agent should
appear, it would seem that this room had been hired for storage
by Mr. Ransom; otherwise it would have been difficult to account
for such a large stock in trade; while the false books were intended
to show the unparelled dullness of the times. The real books were
readily found, and showed that an immense and profitable business
had been carried on. Before night the clerks were paid and dismissed,
and the business of the great house of Grant & Co. was brought to a
summary close.



CHAPTER XII.

HARRISON'S REWARD.

"The hand of the diligent maketh rich."

IN the course of the morning following the events narrated in the
last chapter, Mr. Clarkson accompanied Mr. Kilby to the residence
of Mrs. Danforth. But Harrison had already gone to improve his first
holiday by a visit to Mrs. Haven's cottage. The gentleman, after a
moment's consultation, determined to follow him there, and invited
Mrs. Danforth to be of the party.

The young clerk, who was engaged at the moment in a game of checkers
with Ella, seemed at first somewhat embarrassed at the thought that
they had taken so much pains to see him, but the frank cordiality
of the gentleman soon put the whole party at their ease. Mr. Kilby
called his young friend one side, and endeavored to draw from him
his plan for the future. But Harrison had formed none, and confessed
at length that he needed rest before he could enter upon any
business. The constant anxiety of mind of the last six months and the
additional duties of book-keeper, besides his self-imposed task for a
few weeks, had over-tasked his system, and brought on a constant
headache.

The gentleman proposed at once to take him to a physician; but the
youth did not consider it necessary. The open air, and entire freedom
from anxiety, would no doubt restore him in time.

"Take a little trip into the country," suggested the secret partner,
at the same time taking from his pocket-book a roll of bills.
"You noticed, perhaps," he added, with a pleasant twinkle of his eye,
"that I did not pay you nor dismiss you from my employ. I shall
probably need you in settling up this unpleasant business; but as
I cannot do anything until the trial comes on, it is but fair that
your wages should be continued. I think you mentioned that you were
hired as an errand boy, at thirteen dollars a month, with, a promise
of increase of wages if you did well. Did you ever have an increase?"

"I never asked for any," answered the lad with a rosy blush.

"Well, you were entitled after the first month to twenty dollars.
Why! you could hardly pay your board upon that; and Clarkson tells me
you supported your mother too. Then the salary of a clerk competent
to keep the accounts, ought to be at the least six hundred dollars
a year; and you acted in that capacity for three months. Well, there
is your pay. You needn't trouble yourself to count it over," as the
youth, hardly, knowing what he was about, began to fumble among the
bills. "Come, put it away. It isn't civil to be settling accounts
in the presence of ladies."

"But really, sir," exclaimed Harrison, "I never expected one cent
beyond the sum for which I was engaged; and setting aside the
dreadful feeling that injustice would be committed, unless I
contrived some way to prevent it, I learned enough of business in the
store to satisfy me fully for my extra labor."

"All very fair and honest, my young friend, on your part, but very
rascally and mean on mine if you don't allow me to pay my just dues.
I have as yet done nothing more, but there is a great debt on my part
which remains uncancelled. As you have been the means of saving me
from the loss of my entire fortune, you may at least allow me
the privilege of being grateful. But," added the gentleman, pitying
the embarrassment of the youth, "we will talk of that some other
time."

They then joined the circle where Mr. Clarkson, with Ella standing
close at his side, her earnest eyes fixed upon his face, was giving
the ladies an account of Harrison's confidential visit to himself.

"When he mentioned Mr. Kilby's name," he resumed, "I started to leave
the room in search of the gentleman, who had arrived that very day,
and who, I thought, must be somewhere about the house; but I feared
that his presence might be a constraint upon the lad. When he had
advanced still further in his story, I left the room to request the
gentleman not to leave the hotel. After Harrison had expressed his
willingness to go before a magistrate, I sent the secret partner
on before, that he might be present during the interview, only saying
to him that some wonderful revelations were to be made concerning
the firm of Grant & Company."

"I had already entertained some suspicions that all was not right,"
added Mr. Kilby, "and had come on from the West with the intention
of examining the books for myself. Probably had it not been for my
young friend here, I should have taken the new set of books
as presumptive proof that all was right. It has been a good lesson
to me; and for the future I shall keep my business in my own hands."

The gentlemen then rose to take their leave; but before they went,
Mr. Kilby had obtained Mrs. Danforth's consent for her son
to accompany him to Saratoga early in the following week.

Mrs. Haven and Ella begged Mrs. Danforth to remain at the cottage
while he was absent, the little girl pleading that it was so long
since she had seen her old nurse that she wished to renew
the acquaintance.

Mrs. Danforth smiled as she saw Ella whispering earnestly to Harrison
that he must go back at once and bring his mother's work so that she
would be contented to stay. It would be necessary also for him
to make some purchases before his anticipated tour; and so,
with Mrs. Haven's consent, Ella walked with him to the city to obtain
the clothes which his mother needed, and make other arrangements
for leaving home. He confessed to his young friend that he did not
like to carry so much money about with him, and that he meant to get
Mr. Cowles to deposit the most of it in a bank at once. They then
proceeded to the store of a merchant tailor, where Ella gravely gave
her opinion as to the fit of coats, and also as to the comparative
beauty of different patterns of cravats,—the young clerk being
delighted to see that, with additional experience and advance in age,
her taste had improved, so that no longer as formerly did she choose
the most showy colors. Plain black cravats were his preference;
but, to gratify Ella, he took also one with a fine check of green and
black, which she rapturously pronounced "a real beauty."

The purchases being most satisfactorily completed, the young people
returned to the cottage,—rather warm and weary to be sure, but full
of enthusiasm in regard to their walk.

Here, too, a pleasant surprise awaited them; for it appeared to give
Ella equal pleasure as her young friend. In their absence a small
parcel had arrived directed to Mr., not Master, Harrison Danforth,
Vine Cottage.

"Guess before you open it," shouted the excited girl. "Let us all
guess what it is."

"I, for one," commenced the lad, ceasing from his effort to untie the
strings, "cannot form the least idea. I presume it is from Mr. Kilby;
and he has already so loaded me with favors that I don't like
to accept any more."

Mrs. Danforth, to please Ella, guessed that the parcel contained
a purse to keep his money in.

Mrs. Haven confessed that she could easily fancy the contents, but
would prefer not to state her opinion.

Ella then took the small, neatly tied bundle, turned it over
carefully in her hands, looked very mysterious, and then said,
earnestly, "I guess it's a napkin-ring. It's just about the size
that my box was,—I mean the one that father's present of a 
napkin-ring came in."

Great was her surprise, therefore, when, having unloosed the white
wrapping paper, Harrison disclosed a small green case containing
a valuable watch. There it lay on its pure white satin bed, totally
unsuspicious of the enthusiasm it was destined to call forth.

The young clerk gave a scream of joy, exclaiming, "Just what I have
always longed for!" Ella jumped up and down and clapped her hands.
Mrs. Haven smiled complacently: it was what she had fancied; while
the happy mother gazed in unaffected surprise.

On the back of the watch, in the small circlet forming the centre,
were the initials, L. F. K. to H. D.

The beautiful trinket was then passed around the group, and commented
upon according to the different views of each. Mrs. Haven, in her
turn, opened to the mechanism, to explain to him the parts and their
action. It was a lever, and had thirteen jewels.

Ella then expressed a desire to see how Harrison would look wearing
a watch. She had entirely forgotten her fatigue in the joy of the
present occasion. He passed the ribbon around his neck, saying, with
a laugh, "What should I have done, if I had not begun to wear vests?"

"Such a tall man as you," exclaimed Ella, "would look too funny
in jackets. There, it becomes you very well," she added, as she stood
in front of him, with her eyes fastened upon the black ribbon.

The number of times the new watch was consulted within the next hour
it would be impossible to tell. At the end of that time the happy
owner announced, in a tone of triumph, that it had not varied from
the clock upon the mantel a quarter of a second.

At the close of the evening Mrs. Danforth took her son's arm and led
him into her own room. Her heart was full to overflowing; and she
longed to unburden herself to the gracious Being who had been so much
better to her than her fears. While the young people had sat together
in the moonlight, engaged in an animated conversation, she had been
communing with her own heart, and reviewing the path by which she had
been led. Now, she thought, if I could only see my dear son
dedicating all his powers to the service of his Maker, I could die
content. Surely, while his heart is subdued with happiness, I must
urge this upon him.

"I am glad to see you alone, mother," he said, as he seated himself
by her side. "Even the presence of these dear friends does not
compensate me for the loss of your ever-ready sympathy."

"My dear boy!" said she, almost starting at the resemblance to his
father, as he turned toward her with a glance of affection, "when I
look back upon the last six months, it seems like a troubled dream."

"This has been a happy awakening, though, mother, hasn't it? Oh, I
can't tell you how much I have suffered!"

"You have not suffered alone," responded the mother, softly. "My
heart has yearned over you, as I saw you going forth day after day
to your duties, with a cloud settling upon your brow. I could find
no relief except upon my knees."

"O, mother!" cried Harrison, with a burst of feeling, "if your
prayers could save me, I know I should be sure of heaven. Lately," he
added, sinking his voice to a deeper tone, "I have begun in earnest
to pray for myself. I have often asked myself, What have I in my own
heart to keep me from being such a villain as Mr. Grant? O, mother!
I wish that I were really good. I want to feel, as you do, that God
is my friend."

Mrs. Danforth could not answer for her tears. At length, by a great
effort calming herself, she said, "He is ready, my son. The Saviour
waits to be gracious. Open your heart to the influences of the
Spirit. Give up trying to win heaven by your own merits; trust in the
pardoning love of Christ, and you will have peace."

"I have tried to do this, mother. I tried only yesterday. In the
midst of all my trouble, I felt that I needed an Almighty arm to rest
upon. I went into my room to dress; and I kneeled for a moment by my
bed to ask God to forgive my sins for the sake of his Son, and to
take me for his own child. But he seemed to be so exalted that I
could not realize that he would attend to my humble prayer. Then I
begged you to pray for me. Will you pray now, mother?"

She did pray, pouring out her whole heart in supplications for the
soul of her son. She was importunate, and besought the mercy-seat
as if she would not be denied the blessing.

When they arose, Harrison left the room without speaking.

The next morning, the anxious, waiting mother observed that when Ella
ran to him, in her playful way, though he answered her kindly, yet
his mind seemed engaged in thought. He listened with deep attention
as Mrs. Haven read, according to her custom, from the Scriptures, and
soon after took his hat and left the house. But two hours later, when
Ella was just leaving for school, she saw him coming out of his room.

"How provoking!" she cried, "that you have been there all this time,
when I wanted you so much. But come now, please, and walk to school
with me."

He hesitated a moment, and said, "I was just going to find mother";
but she ran and passed him his hat from the rack, and he followed
her out, She looked earnestly in his face, thinking his manner
was somewhat peculiar, and then asked, "Don't you feel well this
morning? you look pale."

"Ella," said he, and his voice was full of feeling, "supposing you
had had a very kind friend, who had given you a pleasant home, and
done everything to make you happy; and more than all, supposing he
had told you that if you would only return the affection he felt for
you, he would give you great riches and every blessing that you could
desire, would it not be very wicked and ungrateful for you
to refuse?"

"Yes, indeed, it would," was the hearty reply.

"Well, Ella, this is just what I have done all my life; and last
night, while you and all the others in the house were sleeping,
I arose from my bed, and resolved that I would do so no longer; that
I would begin at once to love this dear, this best of friends; and,
I want you to begin to love him too. Cannot you think who he is,
Ella?"

"Jesus Christ," repeated the child, softly.

"I hope you will never go on as I have done," he said, "receiving
favors from God, and yet refusing to give him all that he asked
in return—the heart. Will you try to love the Saviour now, my dear?"

"Yes, I will," was the tearful reply.

No words of mine can describe the holy joy which filled that mother's
heart when her beloved son unfolded to her the deep convictions
of his mind, and the peace and love which now filled his soul.

"God has heard and answered me!" she exclaimed, clasping her hands
upon her breast.

Mrs. Haven truly rejoiced with her friend at this new token of divine
faithfulness.

The next day, when Harrison was going, by appointment, to call upon
Mr. Kilby, in reference to their projected tour, Mrs. Danforth asked,
"Would it not be better to decline the invitation? I fear it would
dissipate your mind at this time." Harrison approached her and
whispered, "God will be there, mother; I have given myself to him,
and he will protect me from all harm."



CHAPTER XIII.

ALFRED A SAILOR.

"The expectation of the wicked shall perish."

IT is painful to turn from so pleasing a picture to one widely
different. We must now go back, in imagination, two years, to the
time when Alfred Haven turned from his mother's door and fled to a
vessel which was lying in the harbor, where he shipped for a long
voyage, under the name of Amos Harding. He found it necessary
to adopt one with the same initials as his own, because so many
of his clothes were marked A. H. These he had packed in a large
carpet-bag and bundle, which, as he always disliked work, he easily
persuaded a boy whom he found in the streets to carry to the wharf
for a few pence. Though in his thirteenth year, he was so large and
of so stout a frame that he might easily be mistaken for a boy
much older. He determined to take advantage of this circumstance,
and demand higher wages. For one of his age, he was already hardened
in sin. Idleness and sloth had done their work; and all that had been
lovely about the boy had long ago disappeared. With an unblushing
countenance, and without the least scruple of conscience, he told
his false tale,—that he was from the country, that he had always
wanted to go to sea, but that the old folks objected. At last,
when they found he was set upon going, they gave their consent to his
making a trial of it for one voyage, hoping he would then settle down
contentedly upon a farm.

"Have you been used to hard work?" asked the captain, looking with
some suspicion at his soft, white hands.

Alfred laughed heartily, as he replied, "Haven't I though! What with
being up in the morning foddering cattle, milking cows, then out
in the field ploughing and harrowing, I've had a terrible hard time
of it!"

The captain took one of Alfred's hand in his own. It was as white and
soft as an infant's, and gave the lie direct to all he had been
saying.

"Those hands have always been my misfortune," cried the boy,
the slightest tinge of color being perceptible, as he saw
the gentleman mistrusted him. "You see they're naturally small,
and the old woman was kind of proud of 'em, and do what I would,
she'd always make me wear gloves or mittens. The old man scolded
and stormed about it, and said my hands were no better than his;
and so that's why—"

"Well, you wont be compelled to wear gloves, now," said the captain,
interrupting him; "the boatswain will soon cure you, my lad;" and
there was a sly twinkle in his eye, which showed he was willing
the youth should be thus cured.

Before he had been one day on the water, poor Amos, as he was called,
became dreadfully sea-sick, and began to regret most heartily
the hasty step he had taken. He lay down on the deck, feeling too
utterly helpless to get into his berth. He thought he was going
to die; and his disobedience to his parents, his unkindness to his
only sister, his unruly conduct at school, his bad example to his
schoolmates, came up in dreadful array before him, like so many
witnesses, to send him to everlasting ruin. In his distress he cried
aloud; but there was no one to soothe his pain, or even to sympathize
with his grief;—no kind mother to hold his aching head, or administer
medicine to relieve the deadly sickness which so awfully oppressed
him;—no one to bind up his swollen, bleeding hands. The rough tars
who saw him lying, pale and weeping, upon the deck, only laughed
at his misery, or gave him a kick to arouse him, while they offered
to give him a junk of salt pork.

The only one who showed him any kindness was the black cook,
who brought him warm water in a small tin pot, and told him if he
would drink it he would soon be relieved.

In three days he was as well as ever, in bodily health; but in morals
he had sadly deteriorated, bad as he was before. He was now forced
to work, and work hard. He was obliged to stand his watch like the
older sailors; to go aloft, to reef and furl the sails, to slush
or grease the masts, sweep and clear up decks, coil up rigging,
pass the balls of spun-yarn, or otherwise assist the older sea-men.

Then when it was fair weather, and no particular work going forward,
he was required to learn to draw and make knots in the spunyarn
or ropes, to set the top-gallant sail, to reef or reduce a sail,
to reeve the gear, or pass the end of a rope through a block or hole
in the vessel, and to learn the names and uses of the ropes.

In addition to all this, if any man wanted help in his job, or there
was any duty to be done aloft or about decks which did not require
the strength or skill of a seaman, he was expected to start promptly,
and do it without waiting to be called upon.

Poor Alfred! He looked back upon his school-life, which, except as an
opportunity for some wicked sport, he had heretofore considered as in
the highest degree irksome, as a life of bliss compared with what he
now endured. "What a fool I was!" he repeated to himself many times
in a day. But now there was no escape for him.

Then the contrast between the luxurious fare of his home and the vile
rations, as he called them, of his mariner's life was, so disgusting
to him that for a long time he could scarcely bring himself to eat
at all. There his richly-cooked food was served in elegant china,
cut glass, and splendid service of plate, while here his ration
of salt beef, bean porridge and ship-bread, cooked for him at the
galley, must be eaten from a small wooden tub called a kid, his tea
or coffee from a tin pot. There were no tables, knives or forks
in the forecastle, unless the latter were furnished by the sailor
himself; and, as Alfred knew nothing of this necessity, he was
obliged to get along as best he could.

The strict discipline on board ship he found almost intolerable.
At sea, the time is marked by bells. At noon, eight strokes are made
upon the bell, and from that time it is struck every half-hour,
beginning at half-past twelve, which is one bell. One o'clock is two
bells, half-past one three bells, and so on until four o'clock, which
will be eight bells, when what is called the watch is out, a term
used for dividing the time, and also for a division of a crew.

As soon as eight bells are struck, the officer of the watch on duty
gives orders to call the watch below, who, if it is the night, are
probably asleep. There is no opportunity for the boy to turn himself
in bed and get a comfortable nap. As soon as he hears the sound,
"Eight bells!" or the hour, "Do you hear, sleepers?" or something
of that kind, he must turn out at once, in order that the other watch
may go below.

While at school, Alfred had always been notorious for disorderly
conduct during study hours. With entire disregard of the rules,
he would whisper, whistle, pinch his companions, or do anything
to draw their attention from their books.

On board ship no conversation was allowed while the men were
performing their work,—certainly not in the presence of an officer.
Occasionally, when two men were by themselves on deck, he had
observed that a little low talk had not been noticed, unless it took
their attention from their business.

On one occasion, when he and one of his messmates, that is, one who
ate with him, were aloft, he began, to joke and laugh, for which
he was immediately reprimanded; and, as he had never learned to be
silent when reproved, he replied, in an insolent tone, "The other men
talk, and why can't I?" For this disrespect of authority, he was
condemned to forfeit half his next ration.

In working ship, when the men were at their stations, the same
silence and decorum were enforced. But when the sailors were together
on the forecastle, at night, and no work was going forward,
considerable noise was allowed.

Smoking, singing, laughing, telling yarns, which means repeating long
stories, made that part of the vessel quite lively. It was during
these hours that Alfred had rapidly advanced in sin. He always put
himself in the way of those who were noted for their profane and lewd
conversation. Here he became skilled in every kind of impurity;
so that his obscene talk was a wonder even to his wicked companions.
But every week he grew more unhappy. There was not an hour in the day
that he did not curse the captain, the crew, his own hard lot, and
sometimes even his Maker. His hands were frightfully torn and
blistered by the rigging; but whenever he complained, he only brought
upon himself a hearty laugh, and the ever-recurring joke of the
gloves. This had no other effect upon him than to curse himself for a
fool, in not being able to invent a more plausible story. No thought
of the sin of lying entered his mind. No sorrow at having violated
the commands of God; nothing but regret that he had not told a more
cunningly-devised tale.

The Dolphin, in which he sailed, was bound for Calcutta, and was to
touch at some small islands for fresh provisions and water. Long
before they reached this port, he had resolved to run away.
He learned from the sailors that banannas and bread-fruit grew wild
upon the islands, and that the natives passed their lives in idleness
and ease. He pleased himself with the fancy that this was exactly
the place for him.

Though the youngest on board ship, Alfred prided himself in being
able to swear as roundly, or talk in as vulgar a strain, as the most
degraded of his companions. They delighted to lead him on in sin,
but secretly despised him for his easy adaptation to their vile
habits. Whether he expressed too much interest in the fact that the
vessel was to touch at the island, or whether the captain had seen
enough of the lad to convince him that no confidence could be placed
in his fidelity, certain it is, that both the first and second mates
had orders to watch him closely while in port; and if he showed
a design to leave the ship, to lock him up in the hold of the vessel.

Totally unsuspicious of this, Alfred asked leave to accompany some of
the men along the shore in search of eggs. He was refused. His eyes
flashed fire; and he muttered a dreadful oath, as he turned away.

"Give me leave to take him in hand!" exclaimed Mr. Bond, the second
mate; "I'll soon break him of swearing at his officers."

"You're welcome to the dirty job," replied the first mate; "I don't
relish such business."

So Alfred was delivered over to the tender mercies of a man whose
dignity as an inferior in command had often been offended by the
lad's insolence and disrespect, though, warned by his messmates,
the boy had been careful to keep within certain limits, to escape
his well-merited punishment.

The captain was on board another vessel, which was being loaded with
palm oil and provisions, where he was to dine; and the first mate,
with some of the crew, were just starting for an expedition to the
island. The coast was, therefore, clear; and Mr. Bond ordered
Harding, as he called him, to appear on deck.

The lad at first refused to obey. He was burning with rage and
indignation that he was not allowed the same liberty as his
messmates. He also began to fear that the vessel would sail again
before he should have an opportunity to escape. While cherishing such
feelings, he could not brook the idea of appearing on deck to answer
to any charge which might be made against him.

"You'll not find me carrying such a message as that for you,"
said the sailor; "and, though I owe you no favors, yet I advise you
to start at once, if you don't want to be shut up in the hold."

Alfred started at this; for his present life of labor and restraint
had become intolerable to him; and, if confined while in port, there
was an end of his chance to escape from it.

"How dare you have the impudence to swear at your officers?" began
the mate, in an angry tone.

Alfred glanced at him from under his half-closed eyelids, and
sullenly remained silent.

"Dogged, are you!" shouted the other, springing forward, and giving
the sailor a cuff across his face.

At this insult, Alfred bounded forward like a tiger, and endeavored
to catch Mr. Bond by the throat; but the other was more than a match
for him; and, before the wicked fellow had come to his senses,
his arms were confined, he was dragged along to the hatch-way, and
pushed down into the hold of the vessel.  Here he was left to reflect
upon the consequences of his conduct, the mate meanwhile nursing
his wrath to keep it warm until the arrival of the captain.

The whole affair was then related to him in an exaggerated form,
the personal attack upon his life having aggravated the rage of his
officer to the last degree.

The captain, who had from the first taken a dislike to the boy,
gave orders to have him remain in confinement until the ship sailed,
and to be kept on water-gruel.

Through the remainder of the voyage, Alfred showed that he considered
himself a much abused and injured lad. He was so surly and
ill-natured that he was disliked by the crew; and, though his tedious
confinement had led him to beware of offending the officers, yet his
manners showed that it was only fear which restrained him from
offering them every species of insult.

He went regularly to work, and formed a plan by which he might
deceive the captain and mates with regard to his intention of
returning with them. He took advantage of various opportunities
to ask the mate how long the Dolphin would remain in Calcutta before
she would return to America,—whether she would sail directly
for home, or go by the way of England. And one day, after having
tried, by strict attention to his duties, to propitiate favor,
he inquired of the captain whether he might not ship on the return
voyage as a sailor, confessing that he was heartily sick of a
seafaring life, and wanted to earn enough to buy decent clothes and
return home.

The captain encouraged him to learn all that he could from the
helmsman, and notice particularly the seamen in their work of mending
the rigging, with the hope of promotion if he did well.

But all this time the wicked boy did not for a moment intend
to return with the Dolphin, or even to go another voyage in any
vessel. He fancied if he could but once be on shore, he should be
able to find some employment far more congenial to his tastes;
or rather that, in some unexplained way, he should be able to live
without working at all. These questions were only to serve as a
blind, to ward off any suspicion that he wished to desert, which he
resolved to do the first opportunity.

Ascertaining from some of the crew the length of time which the ship
usually remained in port, he calculated his chances of success to be
greater if he remained in her until near her time of sailing. He
listened with apparent indifference, but with real interest, to the
sailors as they recounted their various plans for the disposal
of their time, plans, many of them too revolting to mention.

At length the cheerful sound, "Land ahead! land, ho!" was heard; and
both officers and crew began to prepare for the end of their voyage.
Though there was often a tedious delay, on account of the dangerous
sand-banks, in proceeding up the river to Calcutta, in the present
case they were so fortunate as to make a quick passage.



CHAPTER XIV.

THE PARTED SHIP.

"God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in time of
trouble."

THE City of Calcutta is situated on the Hoogly river, which is
a branch of the Ganges, navigable to ships of the largest size.
The Dolphin was a merchant ship, and was laden with ice and
provisions, which the captain wished to exchange for leather,
saltpetre, and other heavy commodities. The crew were required
to remain and assist in unloading the vessel; but, after this had
been accomplished, they were allowed to wander about the city,
provided they returned to the vessel at the expiration of forty-eight
hours.

Alfred was not slow to avail himself of this privilege. He visited
the part of the city occupied by the English, and was delighted
to see the elegant houses, many of them like palaces. These, he
found, were not built in rows, or blocks, as in cities at home,
but stood apart, at some distance from each other, on account of
the intense heat. They were built with high, airy apartments and
flat roofs, and surrounded with verandahs.

From this part of the city he went to what is called the Black town,
occupied by the natives. This presented a striking contrast with the
former. The houses, which are formed of mud, bamboo, or straw mats,
stand upon narrow and crooked streets, interspersed with small
gardens and tanks of water.

Here, I am sorry to say, he was led by his companions into all
species of low dissipation. In this way, day after day was passed,
until the captain announced the time of sailing. His conduct had been
such since his arrival in port that no suspicion was entertained
of his wish to desert. Now was his chance to do so, if ever. The next
time he went out he put on a double suit of clothes, and carfully
securing the small sum of money which remained from his wages,
he took his final leave of the vessel. On several occasions he had
purposely separated himself, for a short time, from his companions,
that they might not suspect him of wishing to do so eventually.
But now, as soon as an opportunity occurred, he ran away and secreted
himself, trembling with fear, until he thought the vessel must have
sailed. Here in a strange laud, unable to comprehend a word of the
language, he suffered so much that he almost wished he had returned
home with the ship. But when he came forth from his concealment, and
ventured to ask if the vessel was still in port, he was too late.
The Dolphin had sailed. Now he returned to the haunts of vice which
had attracted him when he first came to the city, where, in pandering
to his wicked passions, he soon spent every copper he had in the
world, and when night came on he found himself homeless and
penniless. Many times in the course of the next week did the words
of Harrison, so long forgotten, come to his mind, "the wages of sin
is death." Many times he thought he should starve, and probably would
have done so had it not been for the kindness of sailors whom he
accidentally met.

One day when he was so extremely reduced by want that he could
scarcely stand, he tried to crawl along toward the port of Calcutta,
and endeavor to find a vessel ready to sail for America. "I may as
well die in one place as another," he said to himself, "and I shall
certainly die if I remain here."

At length, when he had nearly reached the shipping, he was accosted
in his native tongue by a youth near his own age.

"You look ill, my poor follow; what is the matter?"

"I am dying of hunger," replied Alfred, feebly.

"Come with me, then; I think we can soon cure him. Don't you think
so?" turning to his companion. "Here, let me help you;" and placing
a strong arm around the emaciated, boy, he led him on to the side of
a vessel lying at the harbor. After requesting him to wait a minute,
he darted away, and soon returned with a fine fresh cocoa nut, which
he gave the famishing youth. He seemed to the poor forsaken boy like
an angel of mercy. He had often in his distress fallen asleep
to dream that tempting fruit, such as he now held in his hand,
was placed within his reach, but he had not strength to take it.
Now he feared he should awake and find this also but a dream.

Feeling greatly revived by this seasonable supply of food, he readily
consented to accompany his new friend to the captain of the vessel,
and endeavor to obtain a berth in the barque, which was named
Josephine.

Though he had been so long on board ship; yet here everything seemed
new and strange. The youth, who was called Frank, approached the
captain with the ease, vivacity, and confidence of a child; while in
return the gentleman appeared to feel for him the affection of a
father. Leaving Alfred standing near the forecastle, Frank went on
to tell his tale, and interest the officer in the distressed youth.

"Bring him here," said the gentleman, with a smile; "I'm afraid your
warm heart has led you away, as usual, on some wild-goose chase."

Frank obeyed, and summoned Alfred aft.

Sad to relate, the wicked boy commenced this new acquaintance by a
false tale. He said that he had been sick ever since he was in port,
so sick that he could not reach the vessel; that the captain sent one
of the crew the day before they sailed, to say that they were ready
for sea, and that as he was so unwell he had better remain on shore
for another ship. Since that time, which he alleged was some months
previous to this, he had not been able to work enough to obtain food
sufficient to restore him to health, though his fever had long ago
left him.

The marks of vice were too visible in the countenance of Alfred
for Captain Monroe to mistake his real character; but he saw
no reason to doubt the story of the lad, and, after ascertaining
from him that he knew something of the business of a sailor,
he promoted him from the duties of a boy to those of an ordinary
seaman.

This is one who, from want of sufficient age or strength or
experience, or all of these, is not competent to perform all the
duties of an able seaman, and therefore receives less wages. He is
expected to be well acquainted with all the rigging of a ship, to be
able to steer under ordinary circumstances, to furl a top-gallant
sail, or a royal, which is a light sail next above it. It is commonly
expected that he should be able to make spun-yarn, formed by twisting
two or three rope yarns together, and sennet, a braid plaited
together of ropes or spun-yarn; that he should understand the art
of splicing ropes, forming the rigging, and making a great variety
of knots commonly termed sailors' knots.

Alfred, as we have seen, had never tried to fit himself for the
performance of these duties, though his former captain had
recommended him to do so if he wished to be promoted. Indeed, he had
determined never to go another voyage, so that he had not been at sea
many hours before the mate reported him entirely unfit for a seaman,
and, therefore, degraded him to the rank of what is termed
a green hand.

*    *    *    *    *    *    *

Here we will leave him, while we give a brief account of the youth
named Frank, who first introduced him on board the Josephine; and
who, notwithstanding Alfred's disgrace, took every opportunity
to prove to him that he was his real friend.

Frank, or Francis Greyson, was the son of a gentleman residing
near the large city which was the birthplace of Alfred. He was rather
a sickly boy, and caused his parents great anxiety lest he should
never live to reach maturity. His mother had a brother who was
a seaman, a noble, Christian man, an ornament to the profession
he had chosen. When on shore this gentleman made his home with his
sister. It was not strange, therefore, that, hearing his uncle's
lively descriptions of the sea, and having constantly before his
view—hung as it was between the front windows of his mother's parlor—
a picture of the Sea-shell, the vessel which his uncle commanded,
that he should conceive a desire to accompany him on a voyage.
 
To this Mrs. Greyson at first absolutely refused her consent,
but finally yielded to her brother's solicitations, and the advice
of their family physician that a voyage round the world would do more
for the strong physical development of the boy than a whole case
of medicine.

I have not space to describe any of the incidents of the voyage,
except one which occurred near its close. It is enough for our
present purpose to say that Frank shipped as cabin-boy, without pay,
and therefore was not subjected to the hard work required of Alfred.
By his prompt and cheerful obedience to orders, and his readiness
to lend a hand to any one in need of his services, he rendered
himself a favorite with all on board. From the captain in his office
to the boy-of-all-work, each one was pleased with the opportunity
to do Frank a kind turn.

Every morning and evening when the weather would admit, all hands,
except those absolutely necessary for steering the ship, were called
together to hear the beautiful service of the Episcopal Church; and
often during the day the noble boy might be seen relieving the
tedious watch of the sailor by reading to him the word of God.

On the Sea-shell, an oath or impure word was punished as severely
as any other breach of the rules of the ship, and the captain had
more than once appealed to the sailors, by their affection for the
beautiful boy, who was the pride of the whole crew, to help him keep
his promise to his sister. This was, that Frank, by the blessing
of God, should be returned to her as pure in heart and life as he
left her. There was not an honest tar on board but would have felt
the blush of shame burn his rough cheek to have Frank hear from his
lips a word that could defile his ear.

The voyage had been a successful one, and already the seamen began
to feel the breezes of home fan their cheeks, when on a dark and
tempestuous night, the awful cry of "Ship ahoy! right upon us!"
sounded loud and fearful through the roaring of the tempest.
The shock came so suddenly that before the officers could give any
orders the bowsprit passed over the bulwarks, tearing through shrouds
and rigging. The vessel had parted, and the ship's company were
either clinging to the broken pieces of their vessel or thrown into
the water. Fortunately for them aid was soon at hand. The ship
Josephine, which had been the cause of this dreadful disaster, threw
over buoys, her coops and ropes, and let down boats, to rescue
the poor drowning sailors; but as they were so near home, they,
of course, preferred being taken on board other boats, which carried
them to vessels lying in the harbor, from which they safely reached
the shore.

The noise and tumult in both vessels was beyond description. In the
midst of all the horror and confusion caused by this dreadful
accident, nothing distressed the captain more than the loss of his
nephew. Uniformly calm and self-possessed, he seemed now almost
beside himself with fear and grief as one company after another
reached the ship, and no one could give the least information with
regard to Frank. He tried to realize the truth of what his mates and
others told him so hopefully, that probably Frank had been picked up
by some other vessel, but there was a heart-sinking fear which
predominated above all other emotions, and that was, that his lovely
boy lay at the bottom of the sea.

How should he ever dare to convey to the mother such sorrowful
tidings? How could he meet her anxious inquiries, "Oh, where is
my son?"

He reached the shore, no longer hailed with delight as his native
soil. He forgot that in one moment the savings of his lifetime had
been engulphed by the treacherous waves. Ho forgot everything in his
wild searchings for his boy; and at last was forced to carry bitter,
bitter sorrow and anguish to the hearts waiting with buoyant
expectation for the coming of their loved ones.

In the mean time Frank was not dead. When he felt the terrible crash
which rent the vessel asunder, with one bound he sprang from the
parted ship on board the Josephine, which caused the fatal
catastrophe.

It was not until the sun was several hours high that Captain Monroe,
who commanded the vessel bound to Calcutta, discovered a boy leaning
over the side of the ship, weeping bitterly.

He approached him quickly, inquiring, "What is the matter, my lad;
and how did you come on board the Josephine?"

Frank narrated his wonderful escape from the parted vessel, and was
then led on to give an account of himself and the bitter
disappointment he had experienced in being obliged to go to sea again
without visiting his parents.

"They will think I am dead!" exclaimed the boy, in a passion
of grief; "and my uncle, if he is alive, will blame himself that he
persuaded mother to let me go with him."

"What is your uncle's name?" asked the sympathizing captain.

"His name is James Taylor. The commander of the vessel."

"Ah! why, he is one of my dearest friends!"

"Do you think he was drowned?"

"Oh no! he was picked up and carried on shore."

Frank began to cry again.

"It is a misfortune, certainly," said the good mans his eyes becoming
dewy with sympathizing tears; "but we will try to make it as easy
for you as we can. In the first place, you must write a letter
to your parents, which I will enclose in one to my owners, that it
may be delivered with due caution, and have them ready for the first
vessel we meet. I am sorry to say, though, it is an uncommon
circumstance to speak vessels in the latitude to which we are going;
and therefore you must not be disappointed if we do not have
an opportunity to send home until near the end of our voyage."
This proved to be the case; but in the mean time Frank, with the
natural buoyancy of youth, had recovered his spirits, and had
rendered himself almost as much beloved on board the Josephine
as during his former voyage. With the captain his influence
was almost unbounded. He regarded the sad catastrophe which had
brought him in close proximity to such a youth as one of the greatest
blessings of his life. He had been blessed with a pious mother,
and he had a praying wife; but the influence of worldly cares
had gradually dissipated whatever seriousness he might once have had,
though he still entertained a great respect for religion.

The first thing that particularly interested him in Frank was
observing the soothing effect which prayer had upon him. During
the early part of the voyage, the boy would often give way to bursts
of irrepressible sorrow that he could not have seen his parents and
sister before going again on so long a voyage. In vain his friend
tried to soothe him by promises of presents they would purchase
in Calcutta for the absent ones; his tears would flow like a river.
At length he would go into his little cabin, next to the captain's,
and pour out his griefs before his sympathizing Saviour. In a few
minutes he would return, with a calm, serious air, certainly, but
with his sorrow quite subdued.

On one occasion, Captain Monroe, curious to know the secret of such
an influence, followed the boy and listened at the door of his room.

It was a touching picture: the child upon his knees, wrestling with
his heavenly Father for more submission to his holy will, for the
cheerful acquiescence in his lot, which should prove him to be
following the example of him who drank, without murmuring, the cup
of sorrow to the dregs; for grace to live so humbly that all who saw
him might be won to his Saviour; for the dear ones who were mourning
his loss at home. The officer also appeared, wiping the fast-flowing
tears, at the half-open door.

Frank was not slow to notice the change in the captain's deportment;
and his sorrow for himself decreased as he began to plead with God
for a blessing upon his friend.

Nor was it long before the answer came. One day Captain Monroe called
Frank into his cabin and said, "I have found out why you were
subjected to so bitter a disappointment. God sent you to me, as a
means of leading me to a knowledge of my Saviour's love."

"I was sure," answered the boy, in his simple, trusting manner, "that
God did it for the best; and that was why I tried so hard to say,
'Thy will be done.'"



CHAPTER XV.

FRANK'S RETURN HOME.

"For this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is
found."

AS they gradually approached their native land, Frank asked, "Do you
think father and mother will be at the wharf to meet me?"

The Captain was silent. He was not at all certain that they had
received the letters sent by a vessel five days out from Calcutta.
He knew the moment they reached the shore, in case his friends were
not there to receive him, the ardent boy would wish to fly to their
embrace. He determined, if this were so, to accompany the lad
at once, as it would involve but a few hours absence from his ship,
which he could consign to the care of his mate.

It happened as he had feared. Amidst the crowd assembled at the
wharf, Frank searched in vain for one familiar face. Sympathizing in
his disappointment, Captain Monroe at once ordered a carriage
to convey him to Mr. Greyson's residence, which, as I have stated,
was only a few miles from the city. On the way, he endeavored
to impress upon the mind of the excited youth that his parents
might not have heard of his rescue; and therefore that extreme
caution was necessary in imparting such joyful tidings.

Frank could not realize the danger, but acquiesced in the suggestion
of his friend.

It was just at dusk when the carriage drove slowly into the yard. His
heart bounded with joy. He could scarcely contain himself. He must
scream or do something to relieve his over-burdened feelings.
Meantime Captain Monroe had alighted, rung the bell, and was
presently admitted within the door.

Frank cautiously put aside the curtain and peeped out, saying to
himself, "They wouldn't shut the door so quickly if they knew
who was here!"

The family had just assembled for tea, and Captain Monroe, knowing
that Frank could not be trusted to remain long in the carriage,
proceeded, in rather a blunt manner, to inquire for his friend
Captain Taylor.

"He has gone to sea again," replied Mrs. Greyson, in a sad tone.

The gentleman noticed at a glance that the lady was dressed in deep
mourning; and he inquired, rather abruptly, "Have you heard nothing
from your son who sailed with him?"

Every particle of color vanished from the lady's face, and
Mr. Greyson, who approached quickly to her side, answered,

"Alas! Nothing."

"Can you bear good news, my friends?" Before either of them could
reply, the door softly opened, and Frank, who thought he had been
left alone for an hour, burst into the room and rushed into his
mother's arms.

It was as the gentleman had feared. Such an excess of joy overpowered
her senses; and she would have fallen to the floor but for the aid
of her husband and son. It was not long, however, that she lay
unconscious. She opened her eyes to the happy conviction that
"He whom we mourned as dead is alive again; he that was lost is found."


No such emotions of pleasure existed in the breast of Alfred at the
idea of returning to his native land and visiting his mother, whom he
had left in her hour of bitterest woe. His vices had effectually
weaned him from kindred and home. When he went on shore, he bent
his steps to that house which Solomon has described as the house
of death.

Two days later Captain Monroe met him staggering along the streets
in company with two drunken fellows, with a pipe in his mouth, and a
terrible oath upon his lip.

The good man remonstrated kindly with him upon his wicked course,
which he assured him would lead to swift destruction.

Alfred hung down his head, but made no reply.

"Are you going to sea again?" asked the gentleman.

"Not if I know it."

"What then shall you do?"

"Oh, I can find employment enough on shore."

"Would you like to go into the country and work on a farm?"

"No; work don't suit my constitution," replied the boy, with an ugly
leer at his companions.

"I would be your friend, young man," continued the captain, "but you
will not allow me. But let me warn you that idleness leads to vice,
and that if you do not seek honest employment you will sink deeper
and deeper in sin."

He turned away sick at heart, saying to himself, "I will not tell
Frank that I saw him, he would grieve so over the poor God-forsaken
fellow."

But this precaution proved useless. A few weeks after this,
Mr. Greyson and his son were walking on the wharves, when they saw
just before them a police officer arrest a company of drunken men
for fighting in the streets. Frank gazed at them with great
compassion, when suddenly he recognized Alfred. With a start
of surprise he left his father, ran and seized the hand of the poor
degraded fellow.

"O, Amos!" he cried, the only name by which he had known him; "don't
go with those wicked men; come with me, father will find you
something to do."

"He has been arrested for engaging in a drunken brawl," said the
police officer, "and must come with me to prison."

"To prison! O Amos!" exclaimed Frank with horror.

"You see you can do nothing for him now," suggested Mr. Greyson, "and
you are detaining the officer from his duty."

Frank then ascertained to what place he would be conveyed, and having
obtained a promise from his father to accompany him there, turned
sorrowfully away.

The next day they visited the prison, and found Alfred sullen, and
not disposed to converse. Mr. Greyson endeavored to draw from him
an account of his former life. He appealed to him by his love for his
mother to turn from his evil ways, and become an industrious, useful
man.

But there was no answering sign. No tear dimmed his bloodshot eyes
at the recollection of her who had given him birth. There seemed
to be nothing to appeal to. The moral principle had all gone;
and Frank, who had sat silently gazing at his companion, arose when
his father ceased speaking, and turned away, hopeless of softening
so hard a heart.


Nearly a year later, Mrs. Haven and her daughter were one evening
seated in their pleasant parlor. The lady was sewing, while Ella read
aloud, when they were suddenly startled by seeing a man's face
pressed close up to the window.

The child screamed, but Mrs. Haven, with quiet presence of mind,
bid her run and lock the doors, and call Hannah, a stout maid
servant, from the kitchen.

It had always been Hannah's boast that she feared nothing; and now
she delighted in this opportunity to show her courage.

Feeling protected by her presence, Mrs. Haven threw up the window,
and asked the man what he wanted.

He made no reply, but stood with his insolent eyes fixed upon
her face.

At first she only noticed a frightfully bloated countenance,
long tangled hair hanging from underneath an old soiled cap, and
rude, insolent eyes staring at her and Ella in a dreadfully familiar
and disgusting manner. But suddenly she grew pale and staggered
back-against Hannah, with a shriek of agony crying out, "O, my God!
can this be my son?"

At these words, Ella, who had regarded the man with horror, burst
into a loud cry.

"Open the door, Hannah," sobbed Mrs. Haven, making a dreadful effort
to recover herself. "It is my son! my only son!"

But Hannah, who had always supposed Ella to be the only child,
absolutely refused. "It's imposing upon, ma'am, he is. Sure and the
likes of ye could never have so awful a cratur to call ye kin,
let alone saying he's your son." Mrs. Haven arose from the couch
upon which she had helplessly sunk, and walking feebly to the door,
drew the bolt, and admitted her wayward boy. Ella covered her face
with her hands and sobbed aloud.

"Pretty welcome for a fellow who has been gone two years,
I'm thinking," muttered Alfred. "Ella, do hold your tongue; what are
you making such a great baby of yourself for?"

Hannah stood with an air of defiance, ready to spring at the uncouth, 
shabbily-dressed fellow the moment her mistress would consent. But
finding that there was no appearance of relenting, and that she
seemed reluctlantly indeed, to admit the relation, she exclaimed,
"And sure, ma'am, I'd better be turning him out entirely, though it's
many a day since I've done so dirty job. But I'm thinking it'll be
a disgrace to ye all, let alone me, who allus was called a dacent
girl, to have the wicked cratur in it."

Ella started up and ran from the room, and Mrs. Haven motioned Hannah
to follow her.

Meanwhile the most dreadful struggle was taking place in her own
mind. Her heart had yearned over her son; and since she had learned
to pray, his name and Ella's had always been associated in her daily
supplications. But with her whole soul she shrank from companionship
with such a sin-polluted wretch as this one seemed to be. It was not
that he was poorly clad; it was the unmistakable marks of dissipation
and vice that made him so revolting. She looked at him again;
she scanned him closely to see if there was one trait that was not
wholly depraved. But, alas! she grew more sick at heart every moment.

At length, feeling that she must say something, she inquired, "How
long have you been ashore, my son?"

"Just landed," he replied, glancing up from under his eyebrows. "Got
anything to eat in the house?" then adding, with an oath which made
her shudder, "haven't tasted a mouthful since morning."

The lady told him to follow her into the next room, where she set
before him food sufficient to make a hearty meal.

He ate voraciously; and then, when he thought he was not perceived,
slipped the silver fork which lay by his plate into his pocket.

His mother, who had been closely watching him, saw the action and
sighed heavily. But it led her to be more cautious in future.

"Got any loose change?" he inquired, starting from his seat; "s'pose
I'd better be going?"

"We are poor, you know, Alfred," was her reply, "and it is only
by close economy that we are enabled to live."

"Ella's rich enough."

"She does not come into possession of her property until she is
of age; but if you are really suffering, lay down the fork you have
taken from the table and I will give you what it is worth. You could
not sell it without risk to yourself, for it is marked."

Alfred poured out a volley of oaths, until his mother pressed her
hand upon his eyes, exclaiming, "How can I endure this!"

The fork was thrown angrily upon the table; then, holding out
his hand for the money, lie strode rudely from the house, slamming
the door after him.

When Ella ran back into the room, she found her mother weeping
convulsively in a fit of hysterics; and it was a long time before the
united efforts of Hannah and herself could restore her to any degree
of composure. At last the poor mother retired to rest, but no sleep
visited her eyelids. She reviewed the past; and oh, how bitterly
she reproached herself that she had not earlier taught her boy
his duty to his Maker. She looked into the future, and could readily
foresee that, having once obtained the means of gratifying his wicked
passions, he would not be slow to return. Should she thus encourage
him in sin? Should she permit his presence to bring a blight upon the
youth of her lovely daughter? Ah, no! It could not be her duty! If he
were repentant, how gladly would she take him to her arms and
endeavor to lead him back to virtue. Then she was aware, judging from
this one short interview, that he was wholly devoid of honesty, and
that if she admitted him to the house nothing would be safe from his
grasp. Before she arose the next morning she resolved that if he
visited the house again she would let the cottage, and remove to some
other place until he had lost sight of them.

Ella arose from her bed pale and nervous. She took her accustomed
seat at the table, but she could not eat; and at length, with a gush
of tears, sobbed out, "O, mamma, isn't it dreadful!"

Just at this moment a shadow crossed the window, and the poor girl,
with a look of horror, sank back in her chair, trembling like a leaf,
while even her mother shook visibly. But it was only the postman
with letters.

"This will never do," said the lady, glancing at her daughter's
cheeks, which alternately flushed and turned pale. "We will leave
the cottage and hide ourselves from him. I hope we may never see him
again, unless God in his infinite mercy converts his soul."

Through the day they watched with trembling anxiety; but he whom they
much dreaded to see did not return. They would have been relieved
could they have known that he had passed the time in close
confinement, his board and expenses being paid by the State.

At the close of the third day, however, Hannah, who had been sent by
her mistress on an errand, was returning home, when she was suddenly
caught by a man who had come softly up behind her, and before
she could release herself he had beat her unmercifully upon the head.
Her screams at length brought a gentleman from his house who caught
the drunken brute, and detained him until assistance could be
procured to take him to a station-house. The next morning Hannah
was summoned to appear in court, and state his offense. She was
delighted to go, for though she said not a word of her suspicions,
yet she was sure she had recognized the voice of the loathsome fellow
who had tried to impose himself upon her mistress as a son.

Having narrated the circumstances to the judge in her own quaint
manner, which had caused a smile to run all round the court-room,
his honor was beginning to state the sum which the criminal
was fined, when she suddenly interrupted him. "Sure, yer honor,
it's not money I want from the rascal."

"And how should you like him to be punished," asked the gentleman,
much amused at her earnestness.

"Och, yer honor, if ye'd have the goodness to bid some one to howld
the man, and let me whip him forenenst the court, I'd pay him his
dues, I'm thinking. I would have done it at wonct hadn't he come upon
me so unknowst and treacherous like."

A burst of laughter followed this unusual plea.

The prisoner was fined the cost of court, and was bound over to keep
the peace for six months. Failing to produce the sum, he was put
in prison for a certain term, his honor gravely remarking that it
was, indeed, sad to witness the moral degradation of one so young,
and that, as his countenance had become quite too familiar in court,
he was recommended to commence at once a thorough reformation.

Hannah returned to the cottage undecided whether to inform
her mistress that, in the prisoner she had recognized the villain
who had given Miss Ella such a fright. She gave an animated account
of the trial, and the mode of punishment recommended by herself,
at which the lady laughed heartily; but when the honest girl, growing
warm by the interest she excited proceeded to say, "and who, ma'am,
do you think the villian was, but the likes of him who intruded
hisself by appearing befere yees like a ghost at the window, and not
ringing the door-bell, like a dacent man." The lady clasped
her hands, and suddenly left the room.

Presently. Hannah, with a flash of joy illuminating her whole face,
followed. She knocked softly at the mistress's room. There was
no reply. She gently opened the door, and found the distressed mother
upon her knees.

At so unusual an interruption, the lady turned her woe-stricken face
toward the door.

"I've good news for ye, ma'am," exclaimed Hannah; "and so I made
bowld to intrude. The prisoner's name is Amos Harding, and not Haven,
at all. So don't be bothering your dear heart about the vile
scoundrel."

It was indeed a relief to know that the name of Haven would not
be associated with such villainy; but still the widowed mother's
heart was heavy. Before the close of the day, she found
a sympathizing friend and adviser in Mr. Cowles, who readily
accompanied her to the prisoner, to make one more appeal to him
to abandon his evil ways.

This effort, like the preceding ones of Mr. Greyson and Captain
Monroe, proved wholly unavailing. Indeed, he seemed determined
to render himself as loathsome to his mother as possible. She plead
with him by the memory of his father, by the compassionate love
of the Saviour, who (vile as he was) would pardon and sanctify him.
But he laughed her to scorn. As soon as she found that her prayers
and entreaties were useless, she arose at once to leave him, when he
poured out such a strain of profanity and lewdness that she was ready
to sink to the floor.

Before the close of another week, the pleasant cottage, which had
sheltered her in her widowhood, was let for a year; and she,
with Ella and the faithful Hannah, had gone to live in the country.



CHAPTER XVI.

THE CONCLUSION.

"Seest thou a man diligent in his business, he shall stand before
kings; he shall not stand before mean men."

BEFORE we close, we will sketch briefly some of the leading events
in the life of our hero, and then take a final glance at the
principal characters of our story.

Harrison continued in the employ of Mr. Kilby until the business
of the firm of Grant & Co. was finally settled, and proved himself
not only so faithful, but so well adapted to mercantile life, that,
young as he was, the gentleman offered to take him into his store
at the West, and give him a share of the profits, if he would consent
to leave his native State.

But the youth could not for a moment entertain the question
of leaving his mother in her feeble health, and he hesitated about
assuming such a trust as would there devolve upon him until he had
thoroughly learned the principles of the trade.

"If you will not accept my proposition," said his kind friend, with a
smile, "I must do the next best thing for you, and find you a good
place here."

He made many inquiries among his business friends, but found some
objection to every situation that offered until he happened to meet
an acquaintance at a public dinner, when the following conversation
took place:

"Do you know of a good opening for a young man every way
unexceptionable in character and habits?"

"We have a vacancy in our store; but I am anxious to find a youth
to whom I promised to apply in case such an event should occur.
Unfortunately I have lost his address."

"I can recommend my young friend highly," urged Mr. Kilby; and he
related briefly the connection Harrison maintained to him.

"A fine fellow, I have no doubt," was the warm reply; "but I took
a fancy to this lad, and I really want to find him. He had an open,
ingenuous countenance, and eyes that did not quail when you looked
him square in the face. He told me he supported his mother, too; and
I like boys that do that. So, much as I should like to oblige you,
I'll make a thorough search for my friend before I give him up."

"At any rate, you wont object to my calling with him?"

"Certainly not," was the laughing retort; "but don't encourage him
about the vacancy."

The next morning, Harrison, in company with Mr. Kilby, walked to the
wharf, and entered the store of Lombard & Lamb, the gentleman
motioning the youth to walk forward to the counting-room, where he
saw Mr. Lombard writing at the desk, while he stopped a moment
to speak to the other partner.

Harrison instantly recognized the gentleman who had been so kind
to him at the time he was looking for a place. He stood near the
counting-room door, hesitating whether to enter, when the old
gentleman looked up.

"Ah!" he said, holding out his hand, in the most cordial manner,
"I'm glad to see you again. Walk in here; I want to talk with you!"

At this moment Mr. Kilby came forward, when Mr. Lombard said,
quickly, much to the youth's surprise, "This is the one I mentioned.
If he is not engaged, your protegé will have no chance."

The gentleman smiled as he said, "Your description was so good that I
suspected we were talking of the same individual. Before you engage
him, however, I shall wish to be consulted, as he is under my care."

The preliminaries being most happily arranged, Harrison entered
the store of Lombard & Lamb, as salesman, this firm being in the same
general business as that of Grant & Company. Here he maintained
the same character for industry and honesty as when connected with
the other firm, and rose step by step in the confidence and esteem
of his employers, until he joined the firm as junior partner. A few
years later, Mr. Lombard, now at an advanced age, declared his
intention of retiring from active business. He did so; but not until
he had testified by his conduct, his high appreciation of the
energetic habits and the high business qualifications of his young
partner, by giving him an equal share in the profits of the firm.

In all his prosperity, Mrs. Danforth shared, and was often cheered
by her son's assurance that to her faithful instructions, under God,
he owed all his success.

"You early taught me to work, mother," he would say, with a smile of
filial affection, "and it is right you should reap the reward of my
industry."


Mrs. Haven continued to reside in the country for many years,
occupying herself in completing her daughter's education, for which
employment she was well fitted. At length, having entirely lost
all knowledge of Alfred, she ventured to yield to Ella's desire,
and moved back to her pleasant cottage, which had been thoroughly
repaired for her use.

And now, my young reader, if, as I hope, you have followed the
fortunes of my humble hero with interest, let me invite you to visit
with me that fine mansion reared upon the spot where once stood
Mrs. Haven's cottage. It is Christmas eve; and, as we approach,
we see that the house is brilliantly illuminated. It is evident that
company is expected. In a spacious parlor on the right of the hall
stands a fine, noble-looking man, in whom it would be difficult
to recognize our young favorite, Harrison Danforth. Yet, when he
turns to the lady on his left, with a smile, we see that his mouth
has lost none of its sweetness, though the predominent expression
is firmness. In his whole character and bearing, he exemplifies
the text which so animated him in his youth, "Seest thou a man
diligent in his business, he shall stand before kings; he shall not
stand before mean men."

The lady just referred to, is of that beautiful fairness
of complexion which is usually found only in children. As she stands
there by her life's chosen companion, with her soft hair partly
shading her fair forehead, her lips parted in a smile, she looks
too young to have taken upon herself the cares of a matron.  Then,
again, have you never before seen that bright, laughing face,
with the deepening color coming and going like a cloud in a summer
sky? Yes, it is Ella Haven, fulfilling more than the promise of her
childhood, for she has received humbly the chastening rod of her
Heavenly Father, and has come forth from the furnace refined
like silver. For nearly three years the mortal remains of her mother
have been reposing in the quiet church yard; but her soul, through
faith in Christ, rested safely in the bosom of her God.

Near the happy pair, in a quiet corner, sits Mrs. Danforth, with a
look of calm happiness upon her features. She is now receiving
a rich reward, in the usefulness and happiness of her son, for all
her labors, instructions, and prayers in his behalf, and every day
realizes in her own experience the truth of the precious promise,
"Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old
he will not depart from it."

Presently the expected company begin to arrive. Carriage after
carriage drives to the door, is disburdened of its living freight,
and rolls away to make room for still others. Truly, this is
a goodly gathering.

And now the guests have all advanced to their host and hostess,
exchanged cordially with them the compliments of the evening,
and scattered themselves around the room to discuss the topics
of the day. But they have scarcely formed themselves into groups
before a little urchin of three summers is led into the room by his
nurse, from whom he escapes the moment he espies his parents among
the crowd.

"Papa, come! Mamma, see! pretty angels here for Harry," and taking
his father's hand, attempted to pull him from the room. Mr. Danforth
laughingly yielded to the little fellow, though this was not exactly
the programme for the evening; and, after a moment's consultation
with his wife, in a raised voice, requested any of the company
who liked to do so, to proceed to the next room.

Most of those present quickly followed. Upon the doors being opened,
a large Christmas-tree was seen standing in the further corner of the
apartment, the branches hung with small, colored candles,
interspersed with a great variety of children's toys. Suspended above
the tree was the angel referred to by Harry. Its arms were folded
lovingly across its breast; but its wings were spread, as if on this
auspicious eve it hovered over the scene.

But the prettiest tableaux of all was the twenty little boys and
girls, under six years of age, who, in their holiday attire, stood
with raised eyes and clasped hands, apparently entranced by the
heavenly vision. There was a sudden hush among the company to gaze
at them.

Presently the angel's wings began to flutter, as if she wished
to take her flight. But no; she descended and rested on the topmost
branch of the tree, when, wonderful to relate, another angel
appeared, and began to distribute the Christmas gifts. With
outstretched pinions she seemed scarcely to touch the earth, as she
beckoned to one and another of the awe-struck group, and placed some
beautiful trinket within their hands. Not a word was spoken while the
scene lasted, and the silence was becoming almost embarrassing to the
principal actor, when Harry, who had stood watching the angel
with his large, earnest eyes, suddenly cried out, "Oh, it's my mamma!
I see her curls tucked under the cap," clapping his tiny hands,
in his joy.

Seeing herself discovered, Ella lifted her light crown, and her hair
falling to its natural position, the children gave a sigh of relief,
and the company burst into a merry laugh.

The little ones then were invited to a number of pleasant games,
in which Master Johnny Cowles Marland, a little youngster claimed
by our old friend Mary Jane, quite distinguished himself. They were
playing button, button, who has the button? when he arose at once,
and proudly declared himself to be the favored possessor. Neither,
when the game was explained to him, could he be made to understand
that it was right for him to guess, "Harry or Nelly have the button,"
while he held it between his own fingers. "No, no!" he cried; "I has
got the button, and danpa dives me oranges when I tell the truth."

There was quite a shout at this, and one of the gentlemen remarked
to Alderman Cowles, "He is a chip of the old block, I see."

After the games, the ladies and gentlemen walked to the supper-room
to see the children partake of refreshments, when the little ones
were consigned to the care of their nurses, and sent home to their
pillows, to dream of the angels, while the older company returned
to the parlors to seek further entertainment.

From these innocent amusements we must carry the reader to far graver
scenes.

During the evening in question, the mind of Mr. Danforth more than
once reverted to a cold, damp dungeon, not a dozen miles from his
house, where, awaiting his trial for murder, lay a prisoner,—
the brother of his beloved wife. He tried to throw it off and mingle
gaily in the scene; but there would ever and anon come up to his
remembrance thoughts of other days, when Alfred, the haughty, proud,
and idle boy delighted to domineer over him, the poor but diligent
youth. How strikingly in contrast was the meeting of that very day.
God had rewarded the honest exertions of the poor youth, and he was
rich and esteemed among men; while the idle, slothful boy had become
a contemner of God, and had been cast away among the very lowest
dregs of society.

The Monday following Christmas, Mrs. Danforth, wholly unconscious
that her only brother was that day to be brought to trial for his
life, proposed to her husband to improve the first sleighing by a
ride. "Only think!" she exclaimed, with something of the enthusiasm
of her girlhood, "How funny it will be for Harry! You know he can't
remember riding in a sleigh."

"I should enjoy it extremely," said her husband, in a serious tone;
"but I shall be very much engaged to-day, in fact all the week; but
that need not prevent you and Harry from enjoying this fine winter
weather. Robert can be spared from the store, and if you say so,
I'll send him out."

"But what have you to do?" she asked, playfully. "Some public
business, T dare say. I'm almost sorry that people like you
so very well, for I don't see you half as much as I want to."

"Thank you, my dear. The knowledge of your affection will strengthen
me in the performance of one of the most painful duties I have ever
discharged. I am to-day to sit in judgment upon one of my 
fellow-creatures who is on trial for his life. I tremble lest
I should judge him wrongfully."

"Dreadful!" cried the lady. "Who is he, and what is his crime?"

"He professes to be a Spaniard, from Cuba," responded the gentleman;
"but I confess that I have my doubts upon that point. He pretends,
too, that he cannot understand a word of English; but when I was
conversing with the gentleman who accompanied me to the prison,
the man listened as if he comprehended as well as any of us. The
crime for which he was arrested is murder upon the sea. It seems that
there was a very bad set among the crew; and they formed a
conspiracy, headed by this man, to kill the captain, two mates and
the cabin-boy, and then seize the vessel."

"Oh shocking!" exclaimed Ella. "But did they succeed?"

"Only in part. They murdered one of the mates and the poor boy,
who could not be persuaded to join them. The captain by some means
found them out in time to save his own life. Sandoval, as he calls
himself, was put in irons, and the others closely watched until they
reached the port from which they were all sent here for trial."

"Who went with you, Harrison?"

"A gentleman by the name of Captain Greyson,—a fine man, whom I like
extremely. I shall want you to become acquainted with him. He seems
quite sure that he once returned from Calcutta in a ship with the
prisoner, and that he is not a Spaniard, as he pretends. He also is
to be one of the jury men."

"Well, whoever he is," sighed the lady, "I'm sure I pity him with all
my heart. I wonder whether he has any friends. When I hear of a very
bad man, I always think what mamma and I suffered about poor Alfred.
Husband," she added, after a moment's pause, "you needn't send Robert
out; I don't think I could enjoy riding when I thought of you in the
jury-box."

"Nonsense, dear!" he exclaimed, patting her head fondly. "It will be
a comfort to me to know that you are enjoying yourself. I would not
have told you, but I was afraid you might be anxious, as I may be
detained overnight."
 
"What for?" she inquired, in alarm.

"In a case of capital crime, my dear, the jury are never allowed
to converse with any one from the time they are impanelled, or sworn
into their office, until the case is decided."

"Oh, I hope you'll be able to vote for him to be released,"
she urged, gazing earnestly in his face.

"I hope so, indeed, Ella!" he said, turning away, faint and sick
at heart.

"Oh, what would she say!" he exclaimed when by himself, "if she knew
the prisoner was her own brother. I cannot tell her. No; I must bear
this dreadful burden of grief alone. Situated as she is, it might
kill her."

On his way to the court-room he met Captain Greyson, whom we formerly
knew and loved as Frank. "How strange," said he, "that the prisoner
holds out so. Sometimes I am almost tempted to think I am mistaken
in supposing that I once knew him."

"God grant that it may be so," replied Mr. Danforth, in a thrilling
tone; and then recovering himself, added, "it seems to me tenfold
worse to be the means of convicting a countryman."

"Perhaps," rejoined the officer, "if he should be found guilty,
he may be more softened in view of his punishment."

After two days the criminal was remanded to his cell, condemned to be
executed for wilful murder. Indeed, so overwhelming had been
the testimony of his guilt, and that too of the most aggravated
character, that the jury were unanimous in their opinion. How much
one of them suffered during the thirty-six hours that he was
retained, I must leave it to my readers to imagine. He returned
to his mansion pallid, care-worn, and depressed, almost dreading
to see Ella, for fear that she should read the dreadful truth in his
sad countenance.

The family had been to tea when he arrived, and the poor wife
was just deploring her hard fate to Mrs. Danforth when he appeared.

It seemed to him that he had never received so warm a welcome. His
mother brought his slippers and dressing-gown, while Ella bustled
about and passed him a cup of tea with her own hands, which was
presently followed by a more substantial meal.

After he had partaken it, he was sitting with his head concealed
by Harry's curls, trying to evade the inquiries of his wife, when the
door was opened, and the servant announced Captain Greyson.

"I tried to overtake you as we came out of court," said the
gentleman, frankly, "for I intended to impose myself upon your
hospitality, but you were too quick for me. I don't wonder at it,"
he added, gayly casting his eye around the happy group.

"I will order some supper for you at once," said Mrs. Danforth,
rising.

"Certainly you don't mean to impose upon me the duty of eating
two suppers, after such a tedious time in court," he added, with a
laugh. "No, I need nothing, thank you. I stopped at a restaurant
before I came out of the city."

The conversation at length turned upon the poor criminal.
Mrs. Danforth being very anxious to hear the particulars, the officer
kindly complied with her request; Mr. Danforth, taking Harry in his
arms and walking the room, all the while endeavoring to attract
the notice of the other without being seen by his wife.

After describing his really loathsome appearance, his long, shaggy
beard, his uncombed hair, and his look of defiance as he listened
to his sentence, the gentleman, finding his hearers were greatly
interested, went on to give an account of his first acquaintance
with the culprit.

"It was in Calcutta," he began; "I am quite sure of the fact, though
he persists in saying that he is a Spaniard. At that time he called
himself—"

"Captain Greyson!" cried out Mr. Danforth, in a quick, sharp voice,
"do come and tell me whether this is a good picture of St. Peter's
church, at Rome; you have been there often, I suppose."

The gentleman complied, though evidently wondering not a little
at the abruptness of the host.

"In mercy to us all," whispered Mr. Danforth, turning very pale,
"say nothing more; I will explain at some future time;" then added
aloud in a forced voice, "It is said to be very fine. I have long
wanted to ask some one who would be frank enough to give me
his real opinion."

"Excuse me, Ella," he said, as he returned to his seat, and hiding
his face in the neck of the boy, "but really I find myself so nervous
and excitable to-night, in consequence of my long confinement, that I
may be guilty of some breach of etiquette."

The lady glanced anxiously at her husband, and for the first time
noticing his haggard appearance, became really concerned for fear
he would be ill.

"No," said he, "when I have bid Harry good-night, I will throw myself
into the large chair at your side, and get Captain Greyson to favor
us with a description of some of the wonderful sights he has
witnessed."

And so by the kind and considerate care of her husband, Ella was
saved the knowledge of the dreadful end to which her brother's crimes
had brought him. Here we must leave them, trusting that we have
accomplished the object of our simple story by verifying God's
faithfulness to his promises, both as regards the industrious
and the idle.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UP THE LADDER ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
